----- PAGE 1 -----
A MORK-Native Multi-Agent Architecture  
for Long-Horizon Mathematical Theorem  
Proving
Technical design for OmegaClaw, PeTTa/MORK, ThreadKeeper,  
Hyperon/PLN, reproducible computation, and Lean 4
15 July 2026
----- PAGE 2 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  2Contents
Section Subject
Extended Abstract Basic idea, architectural commitments, and 
implementation path
1 Problem definition: theorem proving as persistent 
research search
2 Design goals, non-goals, and governing invariants
3 System overview and component responsibilities
4 The MORK-native proof metagraph
5 Atom schema, indexing, routes, and MORK/MM2 
operations
6 Event journal, commit gate, snapshots, and crash 
recovery
7 Autonomous proof cycle and multi-agent scheduling
8 Context compilation and proof memory
9 Hyperon/PLN as a creative mathematical partner
10 Prompts and OmegaClaw skill architecture
11 ThreadKeeper worker integration and parallelism
12 Reproducible Python experiments and artifact 
provenance
13 Incremental Lean 4 verification
14 Worked case study: importing the N105-N109 proof 
effort
15 Reliability, security, observability, and evaluation
16 Implementation roadmap and extension points
Appendix A MORK atom and event reference
Appendix B Structured worker, context, event, and suggestion 
contracts
Appendix C Prompt templates and skill specifications
Appendix D Configuration example
References Project documentation and research background
----- PAGE 3 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  3Document status. This is a standalone technical design and implementation blueprint, not a claim that every 
described component is already implemented upstream. The symbolic proof topology is placed natively in a MORK-
backed PeTTa metagraph, while a revisioned event journal and content-addressed artifact store provide durability and  
provenance. Repository-specific observations reflect public project documentation accessed on 15 July 2026.
Extended Abstract
Long, speculative mathematical proofs require an AI system to do much more than generate the next paragraph. The 
system must preserve a changing research state over days or months; distinguish theorem, conjecture, computational 
evidence, failed mechanism, and useful bypass; retain abandoned options without continually replaying an enormous 
chat; manage several competing strategies; coordinate numerical and symbolic experiments; revisit old branches when 
a new lemma appears; and know when a striking result is genuine progress but does not prove the literal statement. A 
large chatbot context window can imitate part of this behavior, but it does not supply stable state semantics, graph 
operations, provenance, crash recovery, concurrency control, or independent verification. The human is therefore 
forced to act as a research director, repeatedly saying “take the next sharp move,” remembering the untried alternatives,  
and detecting silent changes in the theorem.
This document proposes a persistent, multi-agent proof-program architecture centered on OmegaClaw, PeTTa/MORK, 
ThreadKeeper, and Hyperon/PLN, with reproducible Python computation and later Lean 4 verification. Its central 
principle is that the persistent proof project, not any LLM conversation, is the agent . LLM calls, Hyperon runs, 
critics, experiment processes, and formalizers are replaceable workers. They receive a compiled view of the project and  
return structured proposals. The project survives provider changes, context truncation, worker crashes, and long pauses 
because its identity and history live outside the conversations.
A central architectural choice is the location of the proof graph. The symbolic topology of the proof project lives 
natively in a MORK-backed PeTTa space rather than in a conventional application database that must be mirrored into 
Hyperon. This is a natural fit for OmegaClaw because OmegaClaw already operates over PeTTa, while PeTTa can 
expose a MORK space that supports ordinary atomspace operations and MM2 transformations.1 MORK’s PathMap 
representation, prefix-oriented indexing, space algebra, and rule transformations are useful for exact structural retrieval,  
reverse indexes, reachability, frontier views, dependency closures, and taint propagation.2 The design nevertheless does  
not identify a MORK encoding path with a mathematical proof route. Semantic routes through the proof DAG are 
explicit derived objects, because different strategies may converge on the same state.
The persistent symbolic state is organized as three linked DAGs. The search DAG alternates OR-like proof states with 
AND-like moves that may create several required subgoals. It records alternatives, reductions, bypasses, 
generalizations, contradictions, and superseding strategies. The justification DAG records claims, exact dependency 
relations, support, criticism, contradiction, and formal verification. The provenance DAG connects attempts to 
contexts, prompts, model and persona versions, artifacts, experiments, critics, and Lean runs. These graphs share stable 
IDs and inhabit one proof metagraph, but their relations remain semantically distinct.
The MORK space contains compact typed atoms: node identities, edge relations, statuses, reverse indexes, route 
references, artifact hashes, and speculative hypotheses. Large theorem statements, proof prose, source code, datasets, 
papers, compiler logs, and binary outputs remain in a content-addressed local artifact store. A claim atom may therefore  
point to a statement blob by hash, and an attempt atom may point to a context manifest and result object. This keeps 
graph operations fast and makes every large object independently reproducible and backup-friendly.
MORK is the semantic and query authority , but the current public PeTTa/MORK wrapper is not treated as the sole 
durability or transaction mechanism. The public mork_ffi surface currently presents a small set of operations around a 
1 TrueAGI, PeTTa repository and MORK spaces documentation, accessed 15 July 2026. The documented MORK backend supports an &mork space, 
ordinary atom operations, matching, and mm2-exec. https://github.com/trueagi-io/PeTTa  and https://github.com/trueagi-io/PeTTa/wiki/MORK-spaces2 TrueAGI, MORK wiki, especially Data in MORK, Space Operations, and the MM2 reachability tutorial, accessed 15 July 2026. https://github.com/trueagi-io/MORK/wiki/Data-in-MORK , https://github.com/trueagi-io/MORK/wiki/Space-Operations , and https://github.com/trueagi-io/MORK/wiki/MM2-tutorial%3A-Reachability-P1
----- PAGE 4 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  4process-global mutex-protected space.3 The design therefore places a deterministic proof-store service in front of 
MORK. Every committed mutation is first represented as a revisioned, append-only event bundle containing an 
expected revision, an optional lease fencing token, typed atom additions and removals, and artifact manifests. The 
event journal is the durability authority. A fresh MORK space can be rebuilt by replay, generated indexes can be 
recomputed, and the resulting digest can be compared with a checkpoint. The journal may be JSONL, a WAL-backed 
append-only event table, or another append-only store; it is not the conceptual home of the proof graph.
A deterministic commit gate is the only component allowed to mutate committed proof state. Explorers, critics, 
Hyperon processes, experimenters, and Lean formalizers write proposals. The gate checks schemas, stable IDs, 
theorem identity, legal status transitions, dependency consistency, artifact hashes, revision numbers, and active lease 
fencing tokens. New claims begin conservatively as conjectural, empirical, or provisional. Numerical agreement 
remains empirical unless the computation exhaustively proves the finite statement or produces an independently 
checkable certificate. A route-level substitute remains a bypass unless an explicit implication chain connects it to the 
literal target. If a claim is refuted or retracted, its dependent claims and closed states are tainted or reopened. Creative 
generation is thus separated from epistemic acceptance.
The most difficult memory problem is deciding what previous information belongs in the next worker prompt. The 
design treats this as context compilation, not informal summarization. Every attempt receives a theorem kernel, an 
active branch capsule, and retrieved ancillary context. The theorem kernel fixes the literal statement, definitions, 
domains, quantifier order, allowed background results, and constructivity or effectivity requirements. The branch 
capsule gives the state, route, selected move, established and provisional claims, open gaps, and latest failure, critic 
report, experiment, or Lean error. The ancillary context is assembled from four channels: exact MORK structural 
retrieval, uncertain PLN relevance, semantic retrieval over prose and literature notes, and deliberate diversity to counter  
tunnel vision. A context manifest records every source, score, status, inclusion reason, exclusion reason, version, token 
allocation, proof revision, lease token, and final packet hash.
OmegaClaw is the persistent coordinator and user-facing research manager. It normally invokes a small high-level 
surface such as proof-create, proof-cycle, proof-status, proof-audit, and proof-export. A proof-cycle atomically 
leases one frontier move, compiles context, dispatches a bounded persona, stores the complete result outside the digest 
channel, validates structured output, invokes a critic or tool worker when policy requires, commits accepted changes, 
updates MORK-derived frontier and taint views, and returns a compact milestone digest. Autonomy is implemented as 
a state machine and search policy: after repeated non-progress, generate five genuinely different mechanisms; queue all  
viable alternatives; backtrack after branch failure; and rebuild a root-level strategy portfolio after global stagnation.
ThreadKeeper supplies a useful bounded-worker pattern, but one theorem is not equated with one permanently alive 
child conversation. Current ThreadKeeper subagents are designed as synchronous, bounded, non-recursive dispatches 
that return a short digest.4 The mapping is therefore: one proof project equals one persistent workspace and MORK 
namespace; one selected move equals one bounded dispatch; one returned digest equals a status line and pointer to full 
attempt files. Two or three workers can initially share a proof-store process. They select moves through one atomic 
lease operation; a query followed by a separate “mark leased” update is forbidden because two workers could otherwise  
choose the same move. Expiring leases and monotonically increasing fencing tokens make late results safe to preserve 
but impossible to commit under an obsolete lease.
Hyperon has a larger role than retrieval or ranking. It is a creative mathematical partner  intended to assume some of 
the guidance role that a human now plays. Because the proof topology already lives in MORK, Hyperon can reason 
directly over claims, techniques, obstacles, analogy mappings, failures, resource tradeoffs, and human guidance 
episodes. It writes structured hypotheses into an explicitly speculative layer: missing-lemma abductions, analogical 
transfers, concept blends, representation changes, obstruction inversions, counterexample constructions, stronger-but-
cleaner lemmas, local-to-global mechanisms, and random/deterministic decompositions. Every hypothesis includes 
3 Patham9, mork_ffi/src/lib.rs , public source accessed 15 July 2026. The present wrapper uses a process-global Space protected by a mutex and 
exposes a compact operation surface. This observation is about the reviewed public source and may change in later revisions. https://github.com/patham9/mork_ffi/blob/master/src/lib.rs4 ThreadKeeper, Subagent Dispatch - Design, accessed 15 July 2026. https://github.com/hlgreenblatt/ThreadKeeper/blob/threadkeeper/docs/subagent-design.md
----- PAGE 5 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  5source atoms, prerequisites, expected consequences, novelty and abductive-support annotations, an early falsification 
test, and a review condition. An LLM elaborates selected hypotheses into explicit mathematics. Critics, experiments, 
Lean, and the commit gate determine what becomes accepted. PLN truth values and analogy scores never map directly 
to theorem status.
Parallel search resembles a chess engine only in part. Mathematical moves are dynamically generated, a single move 
may create several mandatory subgoals, and transpositions are common. The first scheduler should therefore be an 
auditable best-first AND/OR search using MORK to construct the eligible candidate set and Python or PLN to score it 
by promise, novelty, expected information gain, verification value, cost, and repeated-failure risk. Later, after enough 
empirical attempt data exists, the scheduler can add PUCT, progressive widening, proof-number signals, transposition 
statistics, and model/persona diversity. Objective signals—subgoals closed, critics survived, claims formally verified, 
contradictions discovered, branches pruned—are preferred to an LLM’s self-reported confidence.
Python experiments and Lean 4 verification operate at attempt and claim granularity. Each experiment begins with a 
specification stating the mathematical question, competing hypotheses, domain, seed policy, expected outcomes, and 
inferential limits. Code, commands, environment, inputs, stdout, stderr, results, certificates, and hashes are retained. 
Lean is introduced incrementally: each stable claim receives a statement-alignment record, stable declaration name, 
pinned toolchain and library revision, small source file, and classified checker result. Only the exact declaration and 
dependency versions accepted by Lean become lean-verified.
The supplied proof interaction is a useful realistic fixture. Its N105–N109 progression includes conceptual compression  
of many moment calculations into a general theorem; a literal target left open while a deterministic algebraic shield 
supplies a route-level substitute; a spectral shield that changes the entropy mechanism; a Hall-expander shield that 
strengthens algebraic immunity; attached Python verifiers, PDFs, LaTeX, and logs; and a final high-degree residual 
target that remains active. A transcript can narrate the sequence. A MORK proof metagraph can represent it precisely 
through relations such as supersedes, bypasses, strengthens-route, depends-on, verified-by-experiment , exposes-
barrier, and leaves-open.
The resulting architecture is intentionally simple at its safety-critical core: one proof-store owner per active theorem, a 
MORK semantic space, an append-only event journal, a content-addressed artifact store, narrow OmegaClaw skills, 
bounded ThreadKeeper workers, and explicit commit rules. It is maintainable enough to build now, while leaving clean  
extension points for richer MM2 transformations, PLN creativity, learned scheduling, asynchronous workers, formal 
proof, and larger-scale multi-searcher theorem exploration.
1. Problem Definition and Design Goals
1.1 The task is research management as well as theorem proving
A long speculative proof is not a single completion problem. It is a changing research program. The program contains a  
literal target theorem, intermediate lemmas, competing strategies, failed reductions, partial computations, suspected 
obstructions, stronger substitute statements, and external evidence. Some objects are crisp mathematical claims; others 
are search hypotheses about what kind of argument might work. The system must preserve both without confusing 
them.
A chatbot transcript conflates several distinct things:
•the actual mathematical proof state;
•the model’s latest narrative summary of that state;
•the conversational history needed to reconstruct earlier decisions;
•the list of promising moves that were mentioned but never tried;
•tool outputs and local files;
•the model’s confidence, which may not correlate with correctness.
----- PAGE 6 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  6The architecture in this document separates these concerns. It regards natural-language dialogue as an interface and an 
immutable record, not as the state schema of the proof.
1.2 Characteristic failure modes of chat-only proof work
The design is driven by recurrent failure modes observed in long LLM proof sessions.
Context attrition. Earlier definitions, subtle quantifier choices, or the reason a route was abandoned disappear from 
the active context. The model reconstructs them approximately and introduces theorem drift.
Unrecorded alternatives.  A response may list three good possibilities and pursue one. The other two remain only in 
prose and are rarely revisited.
Status collapse. A plausible lemma, a numerically supported pattern, a critic-accepted argument, and a formally 
verified theorem may all be described with similar language. Later steps use the wrong epistemic level.
Narrative backtracking.  When a branch fails, the model has no explicit search state. It may repeat the same idea in 
different words or return to the root without preserving what was learned.
Substitute-target confusion.  A stronger-looking construction or barrier theorem may substantially improve the route 
while leaving the literal theorem open. Conversational momentum encourages calling the route “complete.”
Artifact detachment.  Python code, results, PDFs, logs, and literature notes are generated, but their relation to a 
particular branch and claim is not stable.
Concurrency without coordination.  Several agents can be asked to work in parallel, but without shared leases and a 
common claim ledger they duplicate work, overwrite assumptions, or return incomparable reports.
Human as scheduler.  The human repeatedly decides that it is time to continue, brainstorm, backtrack, challenge a 
claim, run a computation, or try a radically different mechanism. Much of this scheduling work is mechanical enough 
to externalize.
1.3 Functional requirements
The first implementation should satisfy the following requirements.
1.It must resume a proof from local files without relying on provider-side chat history.
2.It must preserve every attempt and every artifact under stable identifiers.
3.It must represent alternatives and mandatory subgoals explicitly.
4.It must distinguish claim status from heuristic promise.
5.It must compile a bounded, relevant context for each new LLM call.
6.It must autonomously continue, backtrack, branch, and audit under configured budgets.
7.It must allow two or three workers to share one frontier safely.
8.It must permit Python computation now and Lean 4 verification later.
9.It must allow Hyperon/PLN to influence both retrieval and creative strategy generation.
10.It must export deterministic, Git-friendly snapshots and remain understandable to a human maintainer.
1.4 Non-goals of the initial implementation
The initial implementation does not need to make the MORK runtime itself the sole durability layer, implement a fully 
general mathematical ontology, run dozens of asynchronous workers, perform end-to-end Lean formalization, or learn 
an accurate value function for every branch. It also should not attempt to replace mathematical judgment with a scalar 
confidence score. The architecture is staged precisely so that a useful persistent proof agent exists before the most 
ambitious components are added.
----- PAGE 7 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  71.5 Design vocabulary
A proof is one persistent project anchored by a literal theorem specification. A state is a snapshot of assumptions, 
accepted dependencies, provisional dependencies, and open goals. A move is a proposed direction from a state. An 
attempt is one bounded execution of one move by one worker. A claim is a reusable mathematical proposition. An 
artifact is a file or external object generated or used by an attempt. A suggestion is a heuristic proposal that may 
become a move but is not itself a claim. A verification is an independent status-changing evaluation by a critic, 
exhaustive computation, or formal prover.
2. Architectural Principles
2.1 The persistent proof project is the agent
The most important principle is that continuity belongs to the proof workspace. An LLM call can be discarded and 
retried. A ThreadKeeper persona can be swapped for another model. OmegaClaw can be restarted. The proof remains 
because its exact state is on disk.
This inversion has several practical consequences:
•worker prompts must be self-contained;
•workers return structured proposals rather than editing the graph freely;
•every summary must cite source IDs;
•the proof engine can reproduce the context of any attempt;
•a new model can continue an old proof without reading the entire transcript;
•provider-side conversation features become optional conveniences rather than dependencies.
2.2 Separate generative cognition from authoritative state mutation
LLMs and Hyperon are most valuable when they can generate hypotheses, analogies, reductions, and candidate 
arguments. They are least reliable when asked to silently maintain a complicated transactional state. The design 
therefore gives generative components broad freedom to propose and a narrow, typed interface through which 
proposals can become durable state.
The proof engine is deliberately boring. It validates identifiers, dependencies, status transitions, leases, files, and 
theorem hashes. This separation makes the system easier to debug: a bad mathematical idea is stored as a failed 
attempt, while a bad committed-state mutation is rejected as a protocol error.
2.3 Use four memories, not two
Two obvious memory layers are a complete history and a structured option tree. A robust system needs four coupled 
memories, all addressable through the proof metagraph.
1.Immutable attempt history.  Every context packet, prompt, response, tool call, critic report, experiment, and 
verifier result.
2.Search topology. States, moves, alternatives, required subgoals, bypasses, contradictions, backtracking, and 
convergent routes.
3.Claim ledger. Reusable propositions, exact statement blobs, dependencies, provenance, and verification state.
4.Artifact memory. Code, data, papers, LaTeX, Lean files, logs, manifests, and content hashes.
The architecture represents the symbolic parts of all four memories in a MORK-backed PeTTa space. The artifact 
payloads remain in a content-addressed filesystem, while a revisioned event journal makes all committed metagraph 
mutations durable and replayable. This division lets Hyperon reason directly over the same graph used by the scheduler  
and context compiler without putting multi-megabyte blobs into the atomspace.
----- PAGE 8 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  82.4 The graph is an AND/OR DAG
A tree is a useful visual projection, but the persistent object is an AND/OR DAG embedded in a larger metagraph.
•A state is normally an OR point: one successful outgoing strategy may close it.
•A move is normally an AND point: if it creates several subgoals, all of them must close.
•A claim discovered on one branch can support several other states.
•Distinct strategies may converge on the same state.
•A theorem may be bypassed by a stronger route-level result without being literally proved.
Stable node IDs are independent of display addresses. A label such as root/strategy-3/lemma-2  is a route, not identity.  
An attempt records both its state and route, because route-specific assumptions and context can differ even when the 
terminal state is shared.
MORK’s PathMap paths should not be confused with these semantic routes. The PathMap indexes encoded expressions  
by shared prefixes. Semantic reachability and route projection are represented by explicit atoms and MM2 
transformations.
2.5 Exact theorem identity is a first-class invariant
The theorem specification should be normalized and hashed. It includes the statement, definitions, quantifier order, 
domains, asymptotic regime, admissible background assumptions, constructivity requirements, and any intended 
uniformity. A proof-complete candidate is checked against this kernel. This prevents a common failure in which an 
agent proves a nearby statement and treats it as the original target.
2.6 Raw records are immutable; summaries are derived
Attempts, prompts, responses, tool outputs, and events are append-only. Branch summaries and global summaries may 
be regenerated as better compression methods become available, but they must record the source IDs and versions from  
which they were derived. No failed attempt is erased. The history is a scientific lab notebook, not a polished 
retrospective.
2.7 Epistemic status is discrete and provenance-bearing
Suggested claim statuses are:
Status Meaning
conjectural proposed, not independently supported
supported a coherent argument or empirical evidence exists, but gaps may remain
critic_accepted an independent critic found no local defect under the recorded assumptions
lean_verified the exact formal declaration was checked by a pinned Lean environment
refuted a counterexample or decisive contradiction was found
retracted withdrawn because a dependency or interpretation failed
The status is not a floating “confidence.” It is a protocol state tied to evidence. Hyperon’s probabilistic truth values are 
useful for heuristic reasoning, but they do not replace this ledger.
2.8 Start with maintainable infrastructure
The first implementation should be conservative:
•one proof-store process per active theorem;
•a MORK-backed PeTTa space as semantic/query authority;
----- PAGE 9 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  9•an append-only JSONL journal or the event journal WAL-backed event log as durability authority;
•content-addressed files for prose and artifacts;
•stable compact IDs, schemas, and atomic leases;
•one explorer and one critic before broad parallelism;
•reproducible experiments before autonomous tool proliferation;
•explicit adapters for OmegaClaw, ThreadKeeper, Hyperon, and Lean.
This is not a retreat from neural-symbolic ambition. It is what makes the ambition testable. MORK, PLN, creative 
rules, and learned scheduling can become progressively more capable without making proof history, transaction 
semantics, or theorem identity depend on an opaque agent conversation.
3. End-to-End System Architecture
3.1 Component overview
MORK-native end-to-end architecture
The architecture has seven cooperating layers.
Human mathematician.  Defines or imports the theorem kernel, resolves semantic ambiguity, reviews durable 
milestones, and can seed or veto strategies. Human interventions are guidance events, not proof evidence.
----- PAGE 10 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  10OmegaClaw mathematician coordinator.  Owns the user relationship and portfolio-level control loop. OmegaClaw’s 
published loop assembles each model call from its prompt, skill catalogue, previous skill results, history, and time.5 The 
proof integration exploits that loop while keeping detailed mathematical state external and authoritative.
Deterministic proof-store service.  Owns revisions, leases, context compilation, schema validation, commit, replay, 
audit, export, and status propagation. It is the sole writer of committed proof atoms.
MORK-backed PeTTa proof metagraph.  Stores the symbolic topology of search, justification, provenance, 
speculative hypotheses, reverse indexes, and derived route/frontier views. PeTTa’s MORK space supports ordinary 
atomspace operations together with MM2 execution.6
Event journal and artifact store.  The journal durably records every committed atom batch. The artifact store retains 
large proof text, code, data, papers, contexts, responses, and verifier outputs by content hash.
ThreadKeeper worker layer.  Runs bounded explorers, critics, experimenters, analogy specialists, and formalizers. 
Full output is written into attempt directories; the returned digest is only a pointer and status line.
Hyperon/PLN creative partner and tools.  Hyperon retrieves, evaluates, and creates speculative mathematical 
hypotheses. Python, literature search, symbolic systems, SAT/SMT tools, and later Lean 4 supply external checks and 
artifacts.
3.2 Authority boundaries
The design deliberately separates three authorities.
MORK metagraph       semantic and query authority
append-only journal durability and replay authority
artifact store       byte-level authority for large objects
The committed MORK state and journal should agree after every successful transaction. Generated indexes and route 
views are rebuildable. A hash manifest connects symbolic references to immutable artifacts.
The current public mork_ffi wrapper is small and appears to expose one process-global mutex-protected space with 
add, remove, match, dump, and MM2 execution operations.7 That is sufficient for a prototype semantic backend but not  
yet the full transaction and persistence surface wanted by this proof system. The proof-store service supplies revision 
checks, batch semantics, fencing tokens, journal append, replay, and snapshots without requiring those concerns to be 
encoded in prompts.
3.3 Why OmegaClaw coordinates but does not own proof memory
OmegaClaw is a continuous neural-symbolic agent with an extensible skill catalogue.8 It is a good owner of high-level 
pacing and human communication. It should not store the whole proof graph in its ordinary history. The coordinator 
remains thin:
1.read compact status and milestone digests;
2.invoke proof-cycle within budget;
3.invoke proof-audit on schedule or before a completion claim;
4.request Hyperon creative expansion after stagnation;
5.surface milestones, contradictions, theorem ambiguities, and resource decisions.
5 ASI Alliance, OmegaClaw Internals: Execution Loop , project documentation, accessed 15 July 2026. https://raw.githubusercontent.com/asi-alliance/OmegaClaw-Core/main/docs/reference-internals-loop.md6 TrueAGI, PeTTa repository and MORK spaces documentation, accessed 15 July 2026. The documented MORK backend supports an &mork space, 
ordinary atom operations, matching, and mm2-exec. https://github.com/trueagi-io/PeTTa  and https://github.com/trueagi-io/PeTTa/wiki/MORK-spaces7 Patham9, mork_ffi/src/lib.rs , public source accessed 15 July 2026. The present wrapper uses a process-global Space protected by a mutex and 
exposes a compact operation surface. This observation is about the reviewed public source and may change in later revisions. https://github.com/patham9/mork_ffi/blob/master/src/lib.rs8 ASI Alliance, OmegaClaw-Core, GitHub repository, accessed 14 July 2026. https://github.com/asi-alliance/OmegaClaw-Core
----- PAGE 11 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  11Provider context may disappear; the project does not.
3.4 Why ThreadKeeper workers are ephemeral
A theorem may run for weeks, but one worker should receive a bounded, sharply specified move. Current 
ThreadKeeper documentation describes a synchronous bounded subagent loop, no subagent-to-subagent recursion, and 
a short returned digest.9 The recommended mapping is:
one theorem project -> one persistent workspace and MORK namespace
one proof branch    -> persistent state/move/claim atoms
one proof attempt   -> one bounded ThreadKeeper dispatch
one digest          -> attempt ID, disposition, and result path
The complete mathematical answer lives in attempts/<id>/result.json  and proof-text.md, not in the digest.
3.5 The proof-store service as anti-corruption layer
Framework APIs and model providers will change. The proof model should not. The service exposes a small stable 
API:
proof-create(spec_path) -> proof_id
proof-cycle(proof_id) -> digest
proof-status(proof_id) -> digest
proof-lease-next(proof_id, worker, ttl) -> lease
proof-commit-result(proof_id, result_path) -> commit
proof-audit(proof_id) -> report
proof-export(proof_id, destination) -> snapshot
Internally it can call PeTTa/MORK, ThreadKeeper, PLN, Python, Lean, or a vector index through adapters. Upstream 
changes remain localized.
3.6 One proof-store owner per theorem
The simplest safe concurrency model is one service process per active theorem. It owns that proof’s MORK space, 
journal revision, leases, and maintenance rules. OmegaClaw and worker processes communicate through a narrow local  
API or Unix socket. A separate global mathematical knowledge space may hold reusable concepts and verified lemmas,  
but a cross-proof import becomes an explicit event with source version and provenance.
This model naturally shards contention and avoids multiple processes mutating a process-global &mork directly.
4. Persistent Proof State and MORK Data Model
4.1 Workspace layout
A practical local workspace is:
proof-workspace/
  proofs/<proof-id>/
    journal/
      events.jsonl
      checkpoint.json
      snapshots/
    theorem/
      theorem-spec.yaml
      theorem-kernel.md
    attempts/<attempt-id>/
      worker-request.json
      context.md
9 ThreadKeeper, Subagent Dispatch - Design, accessed 15 July 2026. https://github.com/hlgreenblatt/ThreadKeeper/blob/threadkeeper/docs/subagent-design.md
----- PAGE 12 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  12      context-manifest.json
      prompt.md
      response.md
      result.json
      proof-text.md
      artifacts/
      verification/
    summaries/
      global.md
      states/
      claims/
    exports/
  objects/sha256/<prefix>/<digest>
  manifests/<artifact-id>.json
  prompts/
  skills/
  schemas/
The MORK space is opened by the proof-store service and may be rebuilt from the journal. The sidecar files make the 
project inspectable and Git friendly. Large objects can be backed up through Git LFS or another object store while 
retaining the same content identity.
4.2 Three linked DAGs in one metagraph
Search, justification, provenance, and speculative layers
Search DAG
States and moves encode the evolving search. Core relations include proposes, requires, alternative, generalizes, 
bypasses, supersedes, contradicts, reformulates, and formalizes.
Justification DAG
Claims are exact propositions with status and dependencies. Relations include depends-on, supported-by, proved-by, 
contradicted-by, verified-by, and invalidates.
Provenance DAG
Attempts link to state, move, route, context, prompt, response, worker, model, artifacts, experiments, critics, and 
formalization runs.
Speculative layer
Hyperon hypotheses and uncriticized move proposals are explicit speculative atoms. They can affect retrieval and 
scheduling but cannot be used as established premises.
----- PAGE 13 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  134.3 Ground-prefix atom schema
MORK’s documentation emphasizes data layout and efficient prefix matching.10 Put stable ground namespace fields 
first and variable positions later:
(proof p17 layer committed state s101)
(proof p17 layer committed move m204)
(proof p17 out s101 proposes m204 e901)
(proof p17 in  m204 proposed-by s101 e901)
(proof p17 out m204 requires s102 e902)
(proof p17 claim-status c308 provisional)
(proof p17 depends-on c310 c308)
(proof p17 produced-claim a411 c308)
(proof p17 attempt-via-route a411 r52)
(proof p17 artifact-blob art92 b3_4VQ7ZJ6)
Forward and reverse edge atoms are intentionally duplicated as generated indexes. They are projections from one 
semantic edge ID, not independent mathematical assertions.
4.4 Stable identity and route identity
State s101 is a stable state. Route r52 is one way of reaching it. Another strategy may reach the same state through 
r87. Attempts record both:
(proof p17 attempt-at-state a411 s101)
(proof p17 attempt-via-route a411 r52)
This avoids duplicating shared lemmas while preserving route-specific assumptions and context. Display addresses 
may be regenerated and must not be database keys.
4.5 Core node types
Proof/theorem. Literal theorem kernel, active revision, root state, and project policy.
State. Current goal, assumptions, established and provisional claim references, open/closed/tainted status, and branch 
summary.
Move. A proposed operation, technique family, target state, required subgoals, score components, cost estimate, and 
status.
Attempt. One execution of one move under one route, revision, context packet, worker persona, and lease.
Claim. Exact statement blob, dependencies, status, source attempts, critics, experiments, Lean runs, and taint sources.
Artifact. Content hash, media type, semantic role, producing attempt, and manifest.
Hypothesis. A speculative Hyperon suggestion with kind, source concepts, prerequisites, consequences, scores, and 
falsification test.
4.6 Claim status and truth values
Protocol statuses are discrete:
conjectural
empirical
provisional
critic-accepted
lean-verified
refuted
10 TrueAGI, MORK wiki, especially Data in MORK, Space Operations, and the MM2 reachability tutorial, accessed 15 July 2026. https://github.com/trueagi-io/MORK/wiki/Data-in-MORK , https://github.com/trueagi-io/MORK/wiki/Space-Operations , and https://github.com/trueagi-io/MORK/wiki/MM2-tutorial%3A-Reachability-P1
----- PAGE 14 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  14retracted
stale
PLN strength/confidence, model confidence, novelty, and scheduler value are annotations. They cannot substitute for 
claim status. A high PLN truth value may cause a hypothesis to be explored sooner, but not to be used as an established  
premise.
4.7 Derived spaces and path algebra
MORK space operations are useful for candidate-set algebra:
EligibleFrontier = (OpenMoves union ReopenedMoves)
                   subtract LeasedMoves
                   subtract RefutedMoves
                   subtract DominatedMoves
                   subtract ExhaustedMoves
Other derived views include dependency closure, ancestor routes, shared route prefixes, tainted claims, sibling failures, 
and context candidates. MM2 transformations can materialize reverse indexes, reachability, generations, route 
projections, and bounded taint propagation. Numeric scoring may be computed in Python or PLN while exact set 
construction remains symbolic.
A MORK encoding path is not itself a semantic proof route. The latter is constructed from explicit search-edge atoms.
4.8 Artifact references and symbol constraints
Keep atom arities regular and symbols compact. Current MORK encoding documentation describes practical limits in 
its tag layout for symbol lengths, arities, and variable references.11 Do not insert enormous statements, raw filesystem 
paths, or a multi-kilobyte JSON document as a single atom symbol. Store a compact ID or base32 digest and resolve it 
through a manifest.
4.9 Event sourcing and authoritative mutation
Every committed change is an event bundle with an expected revision and atom operation batch. The event is sufficient  
to rebuild the committed MORK state. Generated views can be recomputed from committed atoms and versioned 
maintenance rules.
11 TrueAGI, MORK wiki, especially Data in MORK, Space Operations, and the MM2 reachability tutorial, accessed 15 July 2026. https://github.com/trueagi-io/MORK/wiki/Data-in-MORK , https://github.com/trueagi-io/MORK/wiki/Space-Operations , and https://github.com/trueagi-io/MORK/wiki/MM2-tutorial%3A-Reachability-P1
----- PAGE 15 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  15
Journal-first commit and replay protocol
The transaction sequence is:
1.validate worker result, theorem identity, statuses, and artifacts;
2.acquire the proof lock and recheck revision and lease token;
3.append and flush the event;
4.apply the atom batch to MORK;
5.run bounded maintenance transformations;
6.advance the revision and write a digest checkpoint.
If the process dies after journal append but before MORK application, replay completes the transaction.
----- PAGE 16 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  164.10 Taint propagation and reopening
When a claim is refuted, retracted, or changed:
1.mark direct dependents tainted;
2.propagate taint through the justification DAG;
3.mark downstream Lean verification stale when dependency versions no longer match;
4.reopen closed states that depended on the claim;
5.preserve historical attempts and old statuses for audit.
MM2 may derive the affected cone, but the commit gate records the protocol status transitions.
5. Context Compilation: Solving the Difficult Memory Problem
5.1 Why context selection is the central systems problem
Once proof state is externalized, the next worker does not automatically inherit the whole conversational past. This is 
beneficial because the past may contain hundreds of pages of redundant or obsolete material, but it creates the hard 
question identified in the original proposal: what information from earlier work is possibly useful for the next proof 
step?
The wrong answers are at opposite extremes. Supplying the complete history exhausts the context window, buries the 
current obstruction, and causes the model to imitate stale reasoning. Supplying only the latest branch summary loses 
definitions, dependency provenance, sibling failures, and distant lemmas that have become newly relevant. Free-form 
summarization is not enough because a summary generator can omit exactly the detail needed by a later argument and 
gives no record of why a particular item was included.
The proposed solution is a compiler-like pipeline. Inputs are typed records in the proof workspace; output is a bounded 
context packet with a manifest. Like a conventional compiler, it has mandatory inputs, candidate generation, scoring, 
optimization under a resource budget, and a reproducible build product.
Context compilation
Context compilation pipeline.
5.2 The three mandatory context blocks
Every mathematical worker receives three top-level blocks.
Theorem kernel
The theorem kernel is always included verbatim or by a versioned canonical rendering. It contains:
literal theorem statement
definitions and notation
quantifier order and domains
asymptotic regime and uniformity requirements
allowed background theorems
----- PAGE 17 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  17constructivity, effectivity, or complexity requirements
explicit nearby statements that do not suffice
hash of the normalized theorem specification
The last two items are important. A worker must know not only the target, but also common substitutes that should not 
be mistaken for it. For a complex research program, the kernel may also name route-level objectives while marking 
them as distinct from the literal theorem.
Active branch capsule
The branch capsule describes the exact local proof state:
state ID and display path
selected move ID and move relation
assumptions currently in force
established claim IDs with short statements
provisional claim IDs, visibly marked as provisional
open goals and their AND/OR semantics
most recent attempt and its disposition
latest critic, experiment, or Lean feedback
branch-local taboo list: mechanisms already falsified here
The capsule should be compact enough to include on every retry. It is generated deterministically from the state graph 
and claim ledger rather than copied from an old narrative summary.
Retrieved ancillary context
Ancillary context contains information that is not mandatory for correctness but may materially improve the next move.  
Sources include:
•ancestor-state summaries;
•sibling branches that attacked the same subgoal;
•prior failures with a matching obstruction;
•reusable claims in the dependency neighborhood;
•relevant experiment interpretations and formalization errors;
•literature notes attached to the same technique or object;
•human guidance episodes in analogous states;
•Hyperon-derived analogies or abductive bridge hypotheses;
•one deliberately dissimilar strategy when the branch is at risk of tunnel vision.
The packet clearly identifies every item by source ID and status. A worker may quote a source ID in its result, allowing  
the system to measure which retrieved items were actually useful.
5.3 Candidate generation
Candidate context comes from four coordinated channels.
MORK structural retrieval.  Query dependency and support closures, route ancestors, failed siblings, shared concepts,  
contradictions, bypasses, artifacts, and previous attempts on the same state. This channel is exact and status aware.
Hyperon/PLN retrieval and generation.  Use uncertain support, analogy, mechanism transfer, and abductive missing-
lemma relations to surface non-obvious material. Hyperon may also create a small number of new speculative 
hypotheses targeted at the current obstruction.
Semantic retrieval. Search proof prose, literature notes, code summaries, and external-source artifacts using 
embeddings or lexical methods. Each retrieved chunk retains its owning artifact and revision.
Deliberate diversity.  When a branch is stale, add one or two structurally dissimilar strategy records even if their 
nearest-neighbor score is lower. This is a controlled antidote to tunnel vision.
----- PAGE 18 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  18Candidate generation is therefore not “search the transcript.” It is a join across exact graph structure, uncertain 
symbolic inference, and textual memory.
5.4 Baseline scoring and diversity
A transparent baseline score is preferable to an opaque learned ranker at the beginning. One workable formula is:
Si=4Di+3Ai+2.5Ei+2Vi+1.5Fi+1.3Pi+Ni−1.5Ri−λCi.
Here Di measures dependency relevance, Ai ancestry or route proximity, Ei semantic similarity, Vi verification status, 
Fi a matching failure mode, Pi PLN support or relevance, Ni novelty, Ri redundancy, and Ci token cost.
The exact coefficients are configuration, not doctrine. Their value is that every inclusion is explainable. Later, learned 
or PLN-derived scores can be blended in without removing the baseline features.
Selection should use a diversity-aware method such as maximal marginal relevance. Otherwise the top-ranked set often  
contains several paraphrases of one idea. The compiler reserves quotas for different evidence classes, for example:
40% dependency and ancestor material
20% failures and critic feedback
15% experiments or formalization feedback
15% analogies and creative suggestions
10% deliberately dissimilar material
These percentages can change with the worker role. A critic receives more dependency and failure material; an analogy  
explorer receives more cross-branch and literature material.
5.5 Hyperon-assisted relevance
Because the proof graph already inhabits MORK, Hyperon does not need a lossy mirror before reasoning. It can attach 
uncertain relevance and mechanism-support relations directly to proof IDs and concept atoms. Examples include:
claim C is structurally analogous to the active obstruction
mechanism M succeeded on a branch with the same failure signature
hypothesis H would bridge two dependency components
artifact A contains a counterexample generator relevant to this state
A PLN score is one feature among several. It should be accompanied by source atoms and an evidence stamp. The 
compiler can prefer verified or critic-accepted material while still including a highly novel speculative hypothesis when  
its falsification cost is low.
The resulting context pipeline is:
MORK exact structure
+ PLN uncertain relevance and creative hypotheses
+ semantic retrieval
+ diversity and token allocation
= context packet plus manifest
5.6 Token budgeting
The compiler allocates a fixed input budget before dispatch. A practical default for a large-context model is:
Block Fraction of input budget
Theorem kernel and protocol 15%
Active branch capsule 25%
Established and provisional claims 20%
Retrieved ancillary context 30%
Output schema and tool instructions 10%
----- PAGE 19 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  19The engine should not fill the context merely because space is available. Extra material can decrease performance. A 
branch with one crisp local obstruction may receive a much smaller packet than a root-level strategy review.
Long records are represented by a hierarchy of views:
one-line index entry
short claim or attempt capsule
branch summary
full source record
artifact itself
The compiler chooses the smallest view sufficient for the role. A worker can request an additional source by ID during 
its bounded tool loop, and that access is logged.
5.7 Context manifest
Every compiled packet has a machine-readable manifest:
{
  "context_id": "ctx-01J...",
  "proof_id": "proof-...",
  "state_id": "state-...",
  "move_id": "move-...",
  "theorem_hash": "sha256:...",
  "compiler_version": "0.1.0",
  "token_budget": 56000,
  "token_count": 43192,
  "items": [
    {
      "source_type": "claim",
      "source_id": "clm-...",
      "view": "capsule",
      "score": 9.31,
      "reasons": ["logical_dependency", "critic_accepted"],
      "status": "critic_accepted",
      "tokens": 418
    }
  ],
  "high_scoring_exclusions": [
    {"source_id": "att-...", "reason": "redundant_under_mmr"}
  ],
  "packet_sha256": "..."
}
The manifest enables three forms of audit:
•reproduction: rebuild exactly what the worker saw;
•diagnosis: determine whether a bad result followed from bad reasoning or missing context;
•evaluation: learn which retrieval features correlate with useful outputs.
5.8 Context feedback loop
Worker output should include context_use records:
{
  "source_id": "clm-123",
  "use": "essential premise",
  "effect": "closed subgoal G2"
}
A critic can identify missing context retrospectively. The engine then stores a context_miss event, such as “sibling 
counterexample ATT-19 would have falsified this move before dispatch.” These events train retrieval weights and 
Hyperon guidance rules without requiring end-to-end learning from theorem completion alone.
----- PAGE 20 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  206. The Autonomous Proof-Cycle Algorithm
6.1 The unit of autonomy
The main OmegaClaw coordinator should not micromanage individual metagraph records. Its normal action is one call:
proof-cycle(proof_id)
A cycle is deliberately finite. Persistent autonomy emerges by repeatedly executing finite, auditable cycles under time 
and cost budgets. This avoids an unbounded agent loop inside a single tool call and gives the scheduler a chance to 
react after every result.
6.2 Reference algorithm
A reference cycle is:
def proof_cycle(proof_id: str) -> CycleDigest:
    lease = store.lease_best_frontier_move(proof_id)
    if lease is None:
        return audit_or_expand_frontier(proof_id)
    attempt = store.create_attempt_from_lease(lease)
    packet = context_compiler.compile(attempt, lease)
    persona = router.choose_persona(packet, lease.move)
    worker_result = dispatcher.run(
        persona=persona,
        context_path =packet.path,
        result_path =attempt.result_path,
    )
    store.save_exact_dispatch_record(attempt, worker_result)
    proposal = schema_validator.parse(attempt.result_path)
    if not proposal.valid:
        return reject_and_requeue(lease, proposal.error)
    critic = maybe_run_critic(proposal, attempt)
    commit = commit_gate.apply(
        proposal=proposal,
        critic=critic,
        expected_revision =lease.base_revision,
        lease_id=lease.lease_id,
        fencing_token =lease.fencing_token,
    )
    mork_maintenance.update_indexes_frontier_routes_and_taint(commit)
    scheduler.update_statistics(commit)
    summaries.update_from_source_ids(commit)
    return commit.digest
The atomic lease is crucial:
----- PAGE 21 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  21
Atomic frontier leasing with fencing tokens
The system must not query the best move and mark it leased in two separate transactions.
6.3 Selecting the next action
The scheduler considers only moves whose prerequisites are currently satisfiable and whose state is not tainted. A 
baseline priority is:
P(m)=wppm+wiim+wnnm+wvvm−wccm−wddm−wffm.
where:
•(p_m): estimated promise;
•(i_m): expected information gain;
•(n_m): novelty relative to recent attempts;
•(v_m): expected verification value;
•(c_m): cost;
•(d_m): duplication with active leases;
•(f_m): repeated-failure penalty.
Promise is not the same as truth confidence. A low-probability counterexample search can have high information value.  
A formalization attempt may have modest probability of immediate success but high value because it exposes hidden 
assumptions.
6.4 Stagnation and backtracking policy
Autonomous continuation needs explicit thresholds. A default branch policy might be:
After 1 failed attempt:
  classify the earliest obstruction and retry only if a concrete repair exists.
After 2 non-progress attempts:
  invoke the five-mechanism procedure; queue all viable mechanisms.
----- PAGE 22 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  22After 3 failures with the same mechanism family:
  reduce the branch score and backtrack to the nearest OR ancestor.
After 5 branch failures under the same root strategy:
  request a root-level portfolio using different technique families.
After global stagnation:
  run an audit, Hyperon creative intervention, literature refresh,
  and theorem-statement/assumption review before spending more tokens.
Thresholds should be measured in outcomes, not merely model turns. Rephrasing the same argument is one mechanism  
family, even if several workers attempted it.
6.5 The five-mechanism procedure
The “suppose a supermind completed the proof” idea becomes a structured branching operator:
Assume a correct proof or a decisive obstruction is reachable from the
current state. Generate five genuinely different mechanisms.
For each mechanism provide:
- cognitive operator and technique family;
- central idea;
- exact bridge lemma or reduction;
- why that lemma would close the current gap;
- prerequisite claim IDs;
- earliest inexpensive falsification test;
- predicted information gain if false;
- promise, cost, and mathematical risk;
- relation to existing branches;
- whether it proves, bypasses, generalizes, or reframes the target.
Diversity is enforced by technique tags and graph distance. Five cosmetic variations of induction do not satisfy the 
procedure. Hyperon can seed the portfolio with symbolic analogies and abductive candidates; an LLM makes them 
mathematically legible.
6.6 Commit gate
The commit gate checks:
•event and worker-result schemas;
•stable IDs and proof namespace;
•expected proof revision;
•active lease ID and fencing token;
•literal theorem identity and assumption changes;
•legal claim-status transitions;
•existence and hashes of referenced artifacts;
•dependency references and prohibited cycles;
•distinction between empirical evidence and deduction;
•distinction between literal proof, reduction, bypass, stronger substitute, barrier, and failure;
•taint and stale-formalization consequences;
•completion candidates for unresolved dependencies and open states.
The gate then emits one atom-operation event. Workers never issue raw add-atom or remove-atom calls against the 
committed layer. Hyperon may write through a narrow speculative-hypothesis API, but even those writes are journaled 
and namespace checked.
----- PAGE 23 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  236.7 Critic policy
Not every exploratory thought needs a critic, but status-changing results do. A practical policy is:
•critic required for every proposed supported claim used by another branch;
•critic required before marking an AND subgoal closed;
•two independent critics for a proof-complete candidate;
•targeted critic after numerical or symbolic evidence suggests a theorem;
•automatic adversarial review when a worker changes assumptions or quantifiers;
•formal verifier supersedes local stylistic criticism only for the exact formal statement.
The critic should receive a context packet that omits the explorer’s rhetorical confidence and highlights dependencies, 
theorem kernel, and possible failure classes.
6.8 Milestone communication
The user should not receive a message after every cycle. OmegaClaw reports when one of the following occurs:
a durable claim is promoted
a major branch is opened, refuted, bypassed, or superseded
a conceptual compression replaces many local calculations
a new obstruction changes the search program
a resource or semantic ambiguity requires a human decision
a proof-complete candidate is ready for audit
configured time, cost, or safety limits are reached
A milestone report includes IDs and links to artifacts, but is written for humans. The rest remains in the workspace.
7. Prompt and Skill Architecture
7.1 Two layers: behavioral specifications and executable skills
The portable behavioral layer is maintained as version-controlled Markdown SKILL.md files. The executable 
OmegaClaw layer follows OmegaClaw’s current custom-skill pattern: a catalogue description, a MeTTa definition, and  
optional Python or Prolog glue through py-call.12
The skill set includes a dedicated proof-mork-store specification and a proof-hyperon-creative  skill. The Markdown 
files are normative behavioral contracts; the executable wrappers are deliberately thin and call the proof-store service.
7.2 Minimal OmegaClaw skill surface
The coordinator should see only a few high-level skills:
(= (proof-create $spec $workspace)
   (py-call (mathproof.omegaclaw_bridge.proof_create $spec $workspace)))
(= (proof-cycle $proof $workspace)
   (py-call (mathproof.omegaclaw_bridge.proof_cycle $proof $workspace)))
(= (proof-status $proof $workspace)
   (py-call (mathproof.omegaclaw_bridge.proof_status $proof $workspace)))
(= (proof-audit $proof $workspace)
   (py-call (mathproof.omegaclaw_bridge.proof_audit $proof $workspace)))
12 ASI Alliance, Writing a Custom Skill, OmegaClaw tutorial, accessed 15 July 2026. https://raw.githubusercontent.com/asi-alliance/OmegaClaw-Core/main/docs/tutorial-03-writing-a-custom-skill.md
----- PAGE 24 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  24(= (proof-export $proof $destination $workspace)
   (py-call (mathproof.omegaclaw_bridge.proof_export
             $proof $destination $workspace)))
Lower-level lease and commit operations are useful for debugging and specialized orchestration, but normal autonomy 
should call proof-cycle. Paths and identifiers must be quoted and validated inside the grounded implementation.
7.3 Coordinator prompt
The persistent coordinator prompt should emphasize policy, not mathematical detail:
You are the coordinator of a long-horizon mathematical proof program.
The authoritative state is the local proof workspace, not chat history.
At every cycle:
1. Read proof status and honor the literal theorem kernel.
2. Invoke proof-cycle unless an audit, semantic clarification, or resource
   decision is required.
3. If one move is clearly best, pursue it.
4. If several moves are viable, pursue one and preserve the others.
5. After repeated non-progress, invoke structured creative expansion and
   backtracking rather than paraphrasing the same idea.
6. Distinguish established, provisional, empirical, critic-accepted,
   formally verified, refuted, and retracted claims.
7. Never silently change assumptions, quantifiers, constructivity, or the
   literal target.
8. Treat bypasses and stronger route-level substitutes as progress, not as
   completion of the old target without an implication chain.
9. Ask Hyperon for creative guidance when conceptual compression,
   analogy, obstruction inversion, or hybridization is likely useful.
10. Communicate only durable milestones, ambiguities, contradictions,
    resource limits, and completion candidates.
7.4 Worker roles
The first deployment benefits from a small set of sharply distinguished personas.
Persona Primary objective Typical tools
Explorer advance one selected move local record lookup, Python request
Critic find the earliest exact gap claim/dependency lookup
Counterexample 
hunterfalsify a claim cheaply Python, SAT/SMT, small search
Analogy explorer transfer a mechanism from another 
branch/domainHyperon suggestions, literature notes
Experimenter execute a preregistered computation Python sandbox
Formalizer translate one claim to Lean Lean toolchain
Adjudicator compare conflicting reports read-only proof records
The worker prompt includes a non-negotiable output schema. Workers should not be asked to update the committed 
metagraph, rename files, or decide authoritative status.
7.5 proof-step output contract
A worker result is bound to the exact lease and proof revision:
{
  "proof_id": "p17",
  "attempt_id": "a411",
  "move_id": "m204",
  "state_id": "s101",
  "route_id": "r52",
----- PAGE 25 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  25  "lease_id": "lease-771",
  "fencing_token": 14,
  "base_revision": 982,
  "summary": "...",
  "disposition": "reduction",
  "result_relation": "reduces-target",
  "new_claims": [],
  "new_states": [],
  "new_moves": [],
  "closed_goals": [],
  "remaining_gaps": [],
  "obstructions": [],
  "queued_alternatives" : [],
  "artifacts": [],
  "assumption_changes" : [],
  "suggested_critic_focus" : [],
  "confidence_rationale" : "..."
}
Workers may initially propose only conservative claim statuses. The complete machine-readable schema is included in 
the companion bundle.
7.6 Critic prompt
The critic is not asked whether the proof “looks good.” It performs a structured audit:
1. Restate the exact claim and assumptions.
2. List every dependency actually used.
3. Locate the earliest unsupported inference.
4. Test quantifier order, edge cases, sign/direction changes, and hidden
   regularity or finiteness assumptions.
5. Distinguish a repairable exposition gap from a mathematical gap.
6. Check whether the result proves, bypasses, or merely motivates the target.
7. Propose the smallest decisive repair or falsification test.
8. Return a verdict with cited record IDs.
A critic may recommend critic-accepted only for the exact statement reviewed; the commit gate performs the actual 
status transition.
7.7 proof-supermind and proof-hyperon-creative
The proof-supermind skill serves as an LLM-centered strategy expander. The proof-hyperon-creative  skill precedes 
or accompanies it when symbolic guidance is enabled. Its responsibilities are:
•select the current obstruction and concept neighborhood directly from the MORK metagraph;
•invoke a bounded portfolio of creative operators;
•return diverse suggestion packets with evidence and uncertainty;
•request LLM elaboration only for suggestions that pass novelty and coherence filters;
•record which suggestions were adopted and their outcomes.
This pairing gives a useful division of labor: Hyperon searches structural relations and composes heuristic mechanisms;  
the LLM supplies flexible mathematical language and local derivations.
7.8 Prompt versioning and tests
Every prompt and skill has a semantic version and content hash. Attempts record both. Regression fixtures should 
include:
•a branch with a hidden quantifier error;
•a route-level bypass that must not close the literal target;
•a computational pattern that requires a proof rather than extrapolation;
•several queued alternatives where only one is pursued;
----- PAGE 26 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  26•a retracted claim with dependent branches;
•a Hyperon suggestion that is novel but unsupported;
•a ThreadKeeper digest that points to a full result file.
Prompt changes can then be evaluated on replayed proof states instead of judged only by prose quality.
8. Hyperon as a Creative Mathematical Partner
8.1 Hyperon’s role in the MORK-native architecture
The search, justification, provenance, concept, and speculative structures inhabit a MORK-backed PeTTa space. 
Hyperon can therefore reason over the same stable IDs and relations used by the scheduler and context compiler. No 
periodic semantic translation is required, so branch distinctions and provenance remain explicit throughout the 
reasoning process.
Hyperon has three roles:
1.exact and uncertain relevance for context and frontier ranking;
2.diagnosis of repeated failures, barriers, and missing dependencies;
3.generation of genuinely new mathematical hypotheses and moves.
The third role is intended to absorb part of the human research-director function.
8.2 Speculative hypothesis layer
Creative results are first-class objects, not unstructured paragraphs:
(proof p17 layer speculative hypothesis h701)
(proof p17 hypothesis-kind h701 analogy-transfer)
(proof p17 targets-subgoal h701 s103)
(proof p17 source-concept h701 rank-collapse)
(proof p17 source-concept h701 spectral-bias)
(proof p17 suggests-mechanism h701 mech27)
(proof p17 prerequisite h701 c211)
(proof p17 expected-consequence h701 c_candidate)
(proof p17 falsification-test h701 test44)
(proof p17 abductive-strength h701 score074)
(proof p17 novelty h701 score081)
This representation supports provenance, deduplication, review, expiration, later outcome analysis, and learning by 
mechanism type.
8.3 Creative operators
Missing-lemma abduction
Given an active dependency gap, hypothesize the weakest bridge lemma and one or more stronger, structurally cleaner 
variants. Each proposal must state why it would close the gap and what could falsify it cheaply.
Analogy transfer
Find a subgraph in another branch or proof with similar relational roles, for example:
entropy barrier -> deterministic shield -> rare residual set -> random amplification
Map source roles to target concepts and record where the analogy may break.
----- PAGE 27 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  27Concept blending and hybridization
Combine mechanisms that address different resources. The supplied proof effort’s “random core plus deterministic 
shield” pattern is a canonical example: one component handles broad entropy while another eliminates a huge 
structured adversary class.
Representation change and dualization
Propose a new algebra, basis, dual object, geometric model, probabilistic view, category, ideal, flow, energy, or game 
in which the obstruction becomes simpler. The output includes an explicit translation task.
Obstruction inversion
Turn repeated failure into a theorem or invariant. A saturation point in a union-bound method may become a barrier 
theorem that precisely states what new structure a successful route must exploit.
Counterexample and extremal construction
Generate a minimal finite model or extremal family that distinguishes nearby statements. Connect the proposal to a 
bounded experiment when enumeration is useful.
Strengthen to simplify; generalize then specialize
A stronger theorem may expose a clean invariant. Hyperon may propose it, but the graph must retain the implication 
back to the literal target. Likewise a generalization is useful only with a recorded specialization path.
Local-to-global and structure-change operators
Other useful operators include compactness, induction on complexity, local certificates, symmetry breaking, 
quotienting, random restriction, and decomposition by resource or obstruction type.
8.4 PLN support and current limits
PLN can attach strength/confidence and evidence to uncertain support, analogy, and abductive relations. OmegaClaw’s 
current PLN documentation describes supported inference shapes and also notes limitations around more general 
backward or abductive inference.13 The architecture does not assume every creative operator already exists as a built-in 
rule. Domain-specific MeTTa/MM2 rules or a grounded creative service may emit the same provenance-preserving 
hypothesis schema.
The key separation is:
PLN truth value       -> uncertain heuristic support
claim protocol status -> accepted mathematical state
No numeric threshold promotes a claim directly.
8.5 Deliberation pipeline
active MORK neighborhood
        -> bounded PLN and creative rules
        -> hypothesis generation
        -> novelty/redundancy filtering
        -> LLM mathematical elaboration
        -> critic and cheap falsification
        -> speculative move queue
        -> selected proof attempt
        -> outcome returned to MORK/PLN
13 TrueAGI, Probabilistic Logic Networks: MeTTa-native PLN for Hyperon , GitHub repository, accessed 15 July 2026. https://github.com/trueagi-io/PLN
----- PAGE 28 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  28An LLM is especially useful in the middle: translating a symbolic analogy or missing-lemma relation into definitions, 
exact statements, and a first proof plan. The LLM does not erase the hypothesis’s symbolic provenance.
8.6 Five-mechanism procedure with Hyperon
At a difficult state, the coordinator asks Hyperon and an LLM for five genuinely distinct mechanisms. For each:
•core idea;
•exact missing lemma or reduction;
•source concepts and analogous branches;
•why it would close or clarify the current gap;
•prerequisite claim IDs;
•first inexpensive falsification test;
•expected information gain if false;
•promise, cost, novelty, and risk;
•relation to existing moves;
•first executable step.
All viable options enter the speculative queue. One is selected immediately; the others remain addressable for 
backtracking.
8.7 Human guidance as learnable search data
When a human says “try the next sharp move,” proposes an analogy, rejects a representation, or points out a hidden 
obstruction, store:
•state and route;
•cognitive operation implied;
•concepts or branches highlighted;
•chosen move;
•later critic, experiment, and proof outcomes.
Hyperon can induce conditional guidance patterns from these episodes. This is how the system may learn when many 
low-order calculations call for conceptual compression, when a barrier should be inverted, or when a 
random/deterministic hybrid is promising.
8.8 Creativity controls
Control creative search by:
•maximum hypotheses per run;
•novelty floor and redundancy penalty;
•theorem-kernel constraint checking;
•resource and falsification budgets;
•mandatory source provenance;
•hypothesis expiry and review;
•separation of speculative and committed layers;
•human vetoes over forbidden reformulations.
The objective is not maximal weirdness. It is novel, relevant, testable, mathematically consequential search.
----- PAGE 29 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  298.9 Outcome learning
Record whether each hypothesis:
•was elaborated into a coherent move;
•survived criticism;
•was falsified cheaply;
•closed or simplified a subgoal;
•produced a reusable claim;
•contributed to a Lean-verified theorem;
•merely duplicated an existing route.
These outcomes can train better rule weights, retrieval, mechanism selection, and scheduling without rewriting proof 
history.
8.10 Example: N105–N109 as creative mechanism evolution
The supplied proof effort exhibits precisely the transitions this layer should learn. Many fixed-moment calculations 
were compressed into a general Cayley–Bacharach mechanism. A literal random-map statement was bypassed by a 
deterministic algebraic shield. A spectral shield and random quadratic core then produced a stronger entropy 
mechanism. A Hall-expander shield increased algebraic immunity and exposed a cleaner high-degree residual target. 
Hyperon should represent these not only as claims, but as reusable mechanism transformations: conceptual 
compression, obstruction inversion, resource decomposition, and shield hybridization.
9. Parallel Multi-Agent Proof Search
9.1 Why the chess-engine analogy is useful but incomplete
The proposed system resembles a chess engine in that many candidate continuations compete for bounded search 
resources, earlier positions are revisited, and parallel workers share evaluations. The analogy breaks in important ways:
•theorem-proving moves are generated dynamically rather than drawn from a fixed legal-move set;
•a move may create several mandatory subgoals, so the graph is AND/OR rather than alternating minimax;
•the value of a partial proof is difficult to estimate and may be dominated by a newly discovered lemma;
•failed branches can be valuable because they reveal obstructions;
•different branches can merge through shared claims;
•proof checking is asymmetric: a complete formal certificate is decisive, while heuristic value estimates are not.
The right initial model is therefore parallel best-first search over an AND/OR DAG with transpositions , not direct 
importation of a chess search algorithm.
----- PAGE 30 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  30
Parallel leasing
Parallel workers share a leased frontier and authoritative claim ledger.
9.2 Frontier representation
The frontier is a MORK-derived candidate space, not merely a flat list. Committed atoms identify open, reopened, 
leased, refuted, dominated, and exhausted moves. MORK union, subtraction, restriction, and transformation operations 
construct an exact eligible set. Python or PLN then assigns or updates numeric scheduling values.
A frontier entry records move ID, state ID, one or more route IDs, technique family, prerequisite status, estimated 
promise, novelty, information gain, cost, verification value, repeated-failure count, and current lease state. The score 
snapshot used for a lease is retained for later scheduler evaluation.
9.3 Leases and concurrency
The only safe selection primitive is atomic:
proof-lease-next(proof_id, worker_id, ttl)
Under one proof lock, the service expires stale leases, constructs the eligible frontier, selects a move and route, 
increments a fencing token, marks the move leased, appends the event, applies the atoms to MORK, and returns the 
lease.
A worker result includes lease ID, fencing token, and base revision. A late result from token 13 is rejected after token 
14 has been issued. The attempt and artifacts are preserved and may be reconsidered under a new move, but they 
cannot complete the obsolete lease.
For two or three workers, one proof-store process and one MORK space are sufficient. Most wall time is spent in 
model and tool calls, so the short critical section is inexpensive.
----- PAGE 31 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  319.4 Cognitive diversity
Parallelism is most useful when workers have different search biases. The scheduler can reserve capacity for modes 
such as:
exploitation: highest current promise
exploration: high novelty or uncertainty
analogy: cross-branch and external transfer
adversarial: counterexample or gap hunting
empirical: inexpensive computational discrimination
formal: Lean translation or exact symbolic verification
With three workers, a useful default is one exploitation worker, one exploration/analogy worker, and one critic or 
experiment worker. A role-diversity penalty prevents all workers from becoming near-identical generalist explorers.
9.5 Duplicate detection and transpositions
Duplicate detection uses both semantic and structural signals.
•Stable state signatures identify exact transpositions.
•MORK route projections show several paths reaching the same state.
•Claim and assumption sets help distinguish superficially similar but logically different states.
•Embeddings detect paraphrased move descriptions.
•Hyperon concept mappings detect analogical rather than identical duplication.
When two branches converge, retain both route histories and share the state and claims. Do not merge states merely 
because their prose is similar.
9.6 AND/OR propagation
The scheduler should propagate progress through the graph.
•An OR node is solved when any child route closes it.
•An AND node is solved only when every required child is closed.
•A refuted child of an OR node lowers that route but leaves alternatives.
•A refuted required child of an AND decomposition invalidates that decomposition and reopens the parent 
strategy.
•A bypass closes a route-level objective only if that objective’s policy accepts the bypass relation; it does not 
close the literal target automatically.
A simple proof-number-inspired estimate can be maintained:
OR proof estimate  = min(child proof estimates)
AND proof estimate = sum(child proof estimates)
OR disproof estimate  = sum(child disproof estimates)
AND disproof estimate = min(child disproof estimates)
These estimates are heuristic when subgoals are generated dynamically, but they are useful for prioritizing nearly 
closed decompositions.
9.7 From best-first search to PUCT
Best-first search is recommended initially because every decision can be explained. After the system has enough 
attempt data, the priority can include a PUCT-like exploration term:
U(s,m)=Q(s,m)+cpuctP(s,m)√N(s)
1+N(s,m).
----- PAGE 32 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  32Here Q(s,m) is empirical outcome value, P(s,m) is a prior from the LLM/Hyperon scheduler, N(s) counts visits to 
the state, and N(s,m) counts attempts of the move. For proof search, Q should combine multiple outcomes rather than 
binary win/loss:
verified claim production
subgoals closed
branch pruning
counterexamples found
reusable lemmas
context and verification cost
Progressive widening controls the number of newly generated moves. The scheduler expands more alternatives only as 
a state receives more visits or when the existing children stagnate.
9.8 Shared learning without shared confusion
Workers share the committed metagraph, not one another’s unfiltered conversations. New accepted claims, refutations, 
barriers, and artifacts become available through MORK and context compilation. Speculative hypotheses remain 
visibly speculative. This permits rapid cross-branch learning without allowing one model’s unsupported claim to 
become another model’s premise.
A global concept/mechanism space can share verified lemmas and search experience across theorems. Imports into a 
proof namespace are explicit, versioned, and provenance bearing.
9.9 Scaling beyond a few workers
Beyond a few workers, shard by theorem: one proof-store owner and MORK space per theorem, plus a separate global 
knowledge service. Add asynchronous job IDs, polling, cancellation, and heartbeat renewal to the dispatch layer. Keep 
the same attempt-result and lease contracts.
At larger scale, contention is not the only concern. Search quality can degrade through correlated move generation. Use  
model/persona diversity, technique quotas, novelty constraints, and progressive widening. Scale only when objective 
proof progress per unit cost improves.
10. Reproducible Computation and Artifact Management
10.1 Computation as a first-class proof action
In exploratory mathematics, a “proof step” may be a Python program that enumerates small cases, estimates a 
distribution, searches for a counterexample, verifies a combinatorial identity, or discovers a pattern. These actions 
should not be pasted into the transcript and forgotten. They are attempts with hypotheses, methods, outputs, and 
interpretation limits.
The artifact system is designed so that another machine can reproduce the run and another agent can understand what 
conclusion it licenses.
10.2 Experiment specification
Every experiment begins with experiment-spec.json :
{
  "experiment_id": "exp-...",
  "attempt_id": "att-...",
  "question": "Does the proposed core-dimension bound fail for n <= 8?",
  "hypotheses": [
    {"id": "H1", "text": "No counterexample exists in the exhaustive cell."},
    {"id": "H2", "text": "A counterexample exists and identifies a missing hypothesis."}
----- PAGE 33 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  33  ],
  "method": "exhaustive enumeration",
  "parameter_space": {"n": [1, 8]},
  "randomness": {"used": false},
  "success_criteria": "Complete enumeration with independent count checks.",
  "interpretation_limits": [
    "Passing finite cells does not prove the asymptotic theorem."
  ],
  "requested_outputs": ["results.json", "counterexamples.json"]
}
The specification is a lightweight preregistration. It prevents a worker from running an ambiguous computation and 
retrofitting a conclusion to whatever output appears.
10.3 Attempt artifact layout
attempts/<attempt-id>/artifacts/
  experiment-spec.json
  code/
    main.py
    helpers.py
    tests.py
  input/
  command.txt
  environment.json
  random-seeds.json
  stdout.txt
  stderr.txt
  results.json
  tables/
  figures/
  interpretation.md
  sha256sums.txt
environment.json records Python version, operating system, package lock hash, relevant CPU/GPU information, and 
tool versions. Container image digests or Nix/Guix manifests can be added later.
10.4 Sandboxed execution
Experiment workers should run with:
no network by default
read-only access to the compiled context and declared input artifacts
write access only to the attempt directory
CPU, memory, wall-clock, and output-size limits
an allowlist of executables and Python packages
captured stdout and stderr
exit status and signal recording
Network access for literature or package installation is a separate, governed action. This separation protects the local 
proof repository and improves reproducibility.
10.5 Numerical evidence semantics
The result contract classifies computational evidence:
Evidence type Permitted conclusion
random sampling empirical support or counterexample found
exhaustive finite search theorem for the enumerated finite domain
exact symbolic computation equality or certificate under the tool’s stated semantics
interval arithmetic bounded numerical claim with recorded precision
independently checkable certificate claim conditional on certificate checker correctness
heuristic optimizer candidate or upper/lower bound, not proof without certification
----- PAGE 34 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  34Evidence type Permitted conclusion
A successful random experiment never promotes an asymptotic claim to critic_accepted. It may increase scheduler 
promise or motivate a lemma.
10.6 Content-addressed storage
Large or repeated artifacts are stored by hash:
objects/sha256/ab/cd/<full-hash>
Artifact records point to the hash and include a logical filename. This deduplicates repeated datasets and ensures that a 
claim references immutable bytes. Ordinary Git tracks manifests and small source files; large objects can use Git LFS, 
an object store, or periodic archive snapshots.
10.7 Deterministic exports and backup
A proof export contains:
normalized theorem specification
current graph and claim ledger as sorted JSON
human-readable status report
all prompt and skill versions used
small artifacts and manifests
content hashes for large artifacts
atom, event, and manifest schema versions
Hyperon ontology and creative-rule versions
Lean toolchain lock files
The live journal can be copied through a transactionally safe checkpoint or backup procedure, but Git should receive a 
deterministic export rather than a partially written tail. Secrets, provider tokens, and personal connector data are 
excluded by policy.
10.8 Literature and external source artifacts
Literature notes are stored as artifacts with bibliographic metadata, access date, exact passages or theorem numbers, 
and a short relevance statement. They are not silently merged into the claim ledger. Imported claims identify whether 
they are assumed as background, independently checked, or merely suggested by a source.
11. Lean 4 Integration
11.1 Incremental formalization, not a final monolith
Lean should enter the workflow at claim granularity. Waiting until a hundred-page informal proof is “finished” and 
then attempting one massive translation is expensive and obscures where formalization exposes a problem. Stable 
lemmas should be formalized as the proof grows.
Lean 4 is a theorem prover and programming language with a small trusted kernel, and mathlib provides a large 
community library and standard project tooling.1415 The proposed agent uses Lean as an independent checker for exact 
formal declarations, not as a blanket endorsement of nearby prose.
14 Lean project, Lean 4 theorem prover and programming language , official documentation, accessed 15 July 2026. https://lean-lang.org/15 Mathlib community, mathlib4, GitHub repository and documentation, accessed 15 July 2026. https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib4
----- PAGE 35 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  3511.2 Claim-to-Lean mapping
A claim record gains:
lean_name
lean_statement_path
dependency declaration names
namespace and imports
toolchain hash
mathlib revision
formalization status
last compiler output
Stable naming matters. A claim ID can map to a generated declaration name such as:
namespace Proof_7F31
theorem clm_01J9A_core_dimension_bound
    (S : Finset (Fin n -> ZMod 2))
    (hcb : QuadraticCB S) :
    affineSpanDimension S <= ... := by
  ...
end Proof_7F31
The informal and formal statements are displayed side by side during review. A human or critic must confirm that the 
translation preserves the intended quantifiers and definitions.
11.3 Formalization loop
select stable claim
-> generate a translation draft
-> run theorem-statement equivalence review
-> invoke Lean on a small file
-> classify errors
-> repair translation or expose mathematical gap
-> commit source and logs
-> promote exact claim to lean_verified when the kernel accepts it
The formalizer receives only dependencies already formalized or explicitly admitted in a separate sandbox mode. 
Production verification must reject sorry and untracked axioms.
11.4 Error classification
Lean failures are classified as:
translation ambiguity
missing definition or library lemma
elaboration/type mismatch
tactic search failure
resource timeout
inconsistent assumptions
likely mathematical gap
formal statement stronger than informal claim
This classification determines the next move. A missing import should not lower mathematical promise. A discovered 
counterexample to the formal statement should reopen the claim.
11.5 Tool interface
A dedicated tool is preferable to a generic shell command:
{
  "tool": "lean-check",
  "proof_id": "proof-...",
  "claim_id": "clm-...",
----- PAGE 36 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  36  "source_path": "lean/Clm01J9A.lean",
  "toolchain": "leanprover/lean4:...",
  "mathlib_revision": "...",
  "timeout_seconds": 120,
  "deny_sorry": true
}
The result includes diagnostics, imported declarations, axioms used, timing, and a source hash. Lake project files and 
lean-toolchain are pinned.16
11.6 Formalization strategy
The scheduler should prefer claims that are:
•central dependencies used by many branches;
•stable enough that their statement is unlikely to change;
•locally self-contained;
•susceptible to hidden edge cases;
•already close to mathlib abstractions;
•bottlenecks whose verification would substantially raise trust.
Formalizing every exploratory lemma immediately is wasteful. Formalizing only the final theorem is too late. The 
claim graph supplies the middle ground.
11.7 Interaction with Hyperon and LLMs
Lean diagnostics become typed obstructions in the proof graph and Hyperon space. Repeated formalization errors can 
trigger suggestions such as:
strengthen an invariant;
split a theorem into an algebraic and a finite-combinatorial lemma;
replace an extensional equality by an isomorphism;
search mathlib for a canonical abstraction;
weaken a statement to match the actual induction hypothesis.
LLMs remain useful for translation and tactic synthesis, but every accepted result is determined by Lean’s checker.
12. Practical OmegaClaw, PeTTa/MORK, and ThreadKeeper Deployment
12.1 Recommended repository layout
math-proof-agent/
  pyproject.toml
  src/mathproof/
    store.py
    event_log.py
    mork_adapter.py
    scheduler.py
    context_compiler.py
    commit_gate.py
    artifact_store.py
    hyperon_adapter.py
    threadkeeper_adapter.py
    lean_adapter.py
  omegaclaw/
    proof_skills.metta
  mork/
    proof_atoms.metta
    indexes.mm2
16 Lean project, Lake build system and package manager , official documentation, accessed 15 July 2026. https://lean-lang.org/doc/reference/latest/Build-Tools-and-Distribution/Lake/
----- PAGE 37 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  37    dependency_reachability.mm2
    taint_propagation.mm2
  prompts/
  skills/
    proof-orchestrator/SKILL.md
    proof-mork-store/SKILL.md
    proof-context/SKILL.md
    proof-step/SKILL.md
    proof-critic/SKILL.md
    proof-supermind/SKILL.md
    proof-hyperon-creative/SKILL.md
    proof-experiment/SKILL.md
    lean4-formalizer/SKILL.md
    proof-audit/SKILL.md
  threadkeeper/personas-subagent/
  schemas/
  config/
  tests/
The proof workspace itself is separate from code so it can be backed up, mounted with stricter permissions, and 
migrated independently.
12.2 Building PeTTa with MORK support
PeTTa documents MORK as an optional backend enabled through its build process, and a MORK space can be 
manipulated using atomspace operations and mm2-exec.17 Pin PeTTa, MORK, and mork_ffi revisions in the proof-store 
deployment. Record those versions in every checkpoint.
Do not let several independent workers write directly to the global &mork handle. The proof-store process owns MORK 
access and exposes transactional high-level operations.
12.3 OmegaClaw integration
OmegaClaw custom skills currently combine a skill-catalogue description, a MeTTa definition, and optional Python or 
Prolog implementation.18 The integration file exposes thin wrappers around the proof-store API. The coordinator 
prompt remains stable even if internal storage or worker dispatch evolves.
A typical OmegaClaw loop result is compact:
proof-cycle: p17 a411 committed; c308 provisional; s102 and s103 open;
Hyperon h701 queued; next critic due; full report in attempts/a411/
Ordinary OmegaClaw memory may store user preferences and portfolio-level history. It does not replace the theorem 
workspace.
12.4 ThreadKeeper integration
The parent creates an attempt directory and dispatch contract:
context path
context-manifest path
result path
artifact directory
lease ID, fencing token, and base revision
The bounded persona writes full results to disk and returns a single-line digest. Workers cannot mutate MORK, parent 
memory, or delegate recursively. A production launcher additionally enforces path, network, CPU, memory, and wall-
clock limits.
17 TrueAGI, PeTTa repository and MORK spaces documentation, accessed 15 July 2026. The documented MORK backend supports an &mork space, 
ordinary atom operations, matching, and mm2-exec. https://github.com/trueagi-io/PeTTa  and https://github.com/trueagi-io/PeTTa/wiki/MORK-spaces18 ASI Alliance, Writing a Custom Skill, OmegaClaw tutorial, accessed 15 July 2026. https://raw.githubusercontent.com/asi-alliance/OmegaClaw-Core/main/docs/tutorial-03-writing-a-custom-skill.md
----- PAGE 38 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  3812.5 Proof-store service and transport
For an initial local deployment, use one Python process per active proof and a Unix-domain socket or local HTTP API. 
The service owns:
•proof lock and revision;
•MORK adapter;
•journal and checkpoints;
•leases and fencing tokens;
•context compilation;
•commit and audit;
•artifact manifests.
A stronger future MORK service may supply named spaces, snapshots, compare-and-swap, and atomic batches 
directly. The surrounding contracts remain useful.
12.6 Configuration
store:
  semantic_backend: mork
  durability_backend: jsonl
  one_process_per_proof : true
  event_hash_chain: true
  maintenance_iteration_limit : 64
scheduler:
  policy: best_first_and_or
  workers: 3
  lease_ttl_seconds: 1800
  virtual_loss: 0.15
context:
  token_budget: 60000
  structural_weight: 4.0
  pln_weight: 1.3
  semantic_weight: 2.5
  include_divergent_strategy_when_stale : true
hyperon:
  enabled: true
  write_layer: speculative
  max_hypotheses_per_run : 12
lean4:
  enabled: false
  command: lake env lean
12.7 Operational commands
mathproof create theorem-spec.yaml --workspace WORKSPACE
mathproof status --proof-id P --workspace WORKSPACE
mathproof lease --proof-id P --worker W --workspace WORKSPACE
mathproof prepare-attempt --proof-id P --worker W --workspace WORKSPACE
mathproof commit-result result.json --proof-id P --workspace WORKSPACE
mathproof replay --proof-id P --workspace WORKSPACE
mathproof audit --proof-id P --workspace WORKSPACE
Additional production commands should expose frontier inspection, hypothesis review, context replay, artifact 
verification, checkpointing, and deterministic export.
----- PAGE 39 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  3912.8 Observability
Monitor:
•proof revision and journal tail hash;
•MORK committed and generated-view digests;
•frontier by mechanism and status;
•active, expired, and conflicting leases;
•attempts and objective outcomes by persona/model;
•context source-channel usage;
•Hyperon hypothesis adoption and falsification;
•claim statuses and taint cones;
•artifact verification failures;
•Lean queue and stale formalizations;
•human interventions and cost.
Every dashboard item links to stable IDs.
12.9 Schema evolution, import, and backup
Version event schemas, atom schemas, MM2 maintenance rules, prompts, skills, and artifact manifests. A schema or 
workspace conversion emits explicit events or a revision-zero import stream and verifies replay. Commit journals, 
checkpoints, manifests, prompts, skills, and small artifacts to Git. Use Git LFS or another object store for large content-
addressed objects.
13. Worked Case Study from the Supplied Proof Effort
13.1 Purpose and limits of the case study
The supplied 47-page proof interaction is not used here to certify the underlying mathematical claims. It is used as a 
realistic example of long-horizon proof dynamics: conceptual compression, route substitution, computation, new 
barriers, and an unfinished frontier. The document’s later pages record milestones N105 through N109 together with 
PDFs, LaTeX sources, Python verifiers, and logs.
13.2 Importing the transcript
Import is a conservative extraction process, not a summary pass.
1.Freeze the PDF and compute its artifact hash.
2.Create milestone attempts for N105, N107, N108, and N109.
3.Extract claims, exact open targets, newly exposed barriers, and next moves.
4.Classify relations such as supersedes, bypasses, strengthens-route, and leaves-open.
5.Register each PDF, LaTeX source, Python verifier, and verification log as a separate artifact.
6.Emit revision-zero import events and replay them into MORK.
7.Run a theorem-identity and completion audit.
----- PAGE 40 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  40
MORK representation of the N105–N109 progression
The final visible continuation remains an active candidate mechanism, not a completed theorem.
13.3 N105: conceptual compression and supersession
The N105 milestone says that a sequence of fixed-moment classifications can be replaced by a general quadratic 
Cayley-Bacharach core theorem and an all-even-moment argument. In graph terms:
Claims N102-N104: local classifications
Claim N105-CB: general core-dimension theorem
Claim N105-MOM: all-even-moment theorem
N105-CB generalizes and helps derive N105-MOM
N105-MOM supersedes route dependence on N102-N104
N102-N104 remain historical support, not deleted
This is a textbook example for Hyperon’s conceptual-compression operator. Repeated local calculations share a 
structural dependency; the right new move is not “compute the next moment,” but “identify the invariant explaining all 
moments.”
----- PAGE 41 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  4113.4 N107: a bypass that must not close the literal target
The N107 milestone explicitly says that the literal probabilistic full-random statement remains open, while a 
deterministic algebraic shield achieves the security objective for a modified ensemble. The proof graph should 
represent:
Goal G-random-cubic: remains open
Move M-shield: active alternative
Claim C-shield-injective: supported/verified by attached checks
Relation M-shield bypasses G-random-cubic for route objective R
The route objective may be advanced or even solved while the old goal remains open. This distinction is exactly why 
bypasses is an explicit relation and the theorem kernel lists nearby statements that do not suffice.
13.5 N108: obstruction inversion and resource hybridization
N108 introduces a spectral shield and a random quadratic core, increasing the arbitrary-test entropy budget from a 
quadratic to a cubic scale. The structure is:
obstruction: raw moment/union-bound budget is too small
spectral shield: dense language -> sparse set of bad translations
random core: many independent translations
composition: amplify rarity of bad translations
This is an obstruction-inversion pattern: instead of directly counting a huge adversary class, transform each adversary 
into a rare bad-translation set and use a random component to avoid it. Hyperon should store the pattern independently 
of the particular mathematical vocabulary.
13.6 N109: a second shield and a cleaner residual target
N109 adds a sparse Hall-expander shield that raises algebraic immunity to a linear scale at controlled seed cost. It 
composes with the N108 mechanism. The remaining target is no longer “handle every low-degree relation,” but 
specifically compress high-degree, high-multiplicative-depth computation.
The correct state transition is:
large structured adversary subclass eliminated deterministically
cubic-scale arbitrary-test capacity retained probabilistically
residual target narrowed to high-degree/high-depth computation
literal ultimate theorem remains open
This is progress through problem refactoring . The new theorem changes what the next theorem should be.
13.7 Artifact indexing
Each milestone lists a PDF, LaTeX source, verifier, and verification log. These should be attached to the corresponding  
attempt and claims:
N108_spectral_shield_amplification.pdf
  -> exposition artifact for attempt N108
verify_n108_spectral_shield.py
  -> experiment artifact
  -> supports finite checks and parameter ledger only
N108_verification_log.txt
  -> execution output with environment and hash
The claim ledger records what each verifier actually checks. A script that exhaustively tests finite cells does not certify 
the asymptotic theorem unless it emits a separately checkable general certificate.
----- PAGE 42 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  4213.8 How context compilation would improve continuation
At the final high-degree residual target, a context compiler would not replay all 47 pages. It would include:
•the immutable theorem and constructivity kernel;
•N108 and N109 claims actually used by the active route;
•the precise statement that residual compression remains open;
•the algebraic and spectral shield artifacts;
•prior failed compression attempts and their earliest obstruction;
•the candidate XOR/NOT stripping and affine-offset mechanism;
•analogous mechanism records from other branches;
•one or two Hyperon-generated representation changes;
•hashes and source IDs for every included item.
The context manifest would make it clear whether an omitted earlier moment calculation was structurally irrelevant or 
excluded merely by token budget.
13.9 Example Hyperon intervention at the frontier
Hyperon might observe the following structural pattern:
low-degree hiding place eliminated
+ cubic information budget saturated
+ current candidate separates affine structure from AND gates
=> seek a certificate parameterized by multiplicative skeleton rather
   than full circuit syntax
It could create five speculative hypotheses: a multiplicative-skeleton normal form, a random-restriction collapse, an 
algebraic communication certificate, a rank/entropy tradeoff, and a counterexample family to the current encoding 
estimate. Each would include a first finite stress test and source concept IDs. An LLM would turn the highest-ranked 
hypothesis into an explicit candidate lemma; an experimenter would test small XAG circuits; and a critic would check 
whether the certificate is genuinely map-adaptive and below cubic effective entropy.
14. Reliability, Governance, and Security
14.1 Reliability model
The architecture assumes that any generative component can fail. Reliability comes from containment, provenance, 
independent checks, and recoverability rather than from trusting one model.
Failure classes include:
mathematical error
silent theorem drift
malformed structured output
stale or missing context
artifact corruption
worker crash or timeout
duplicate or contradictory commits
provider outage
Hyperon inference explosion
formalization mismatch
security violation
Each class has a deterministic detection or containment path where possible.
----- PAGE 43 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  4314.2 Authority boundaries
ComponentMay read May propose May authoritatively write
OmegaClaw 
coordinatorstatus and milestones high-level actions no proof records directly
ThreadKeeper 
explorercompiled context and allowed 
artifactsclaims, moves, text, tool 
requestsattempt files only
Criticclaim and dependencies verdict and repairs review file only
Hyperonderived projection and selected 
recordsrankings and suggestions derived space only
Experiment 
workerdeclared inputs results and interpretations attempt artifact directory
Lean workerclaim and formal sources diagnostics and checked 
resultverification directory
Commit gateall authoritative records transaction plan the event journal, events, 
canonical sidecars
The “one writer” rule prevents race conditions and accidental status escalation.
14.3 Theorem-drift defenses
The engine enforces:
•normalized theorem and definition hashes;
•theorem kernel in every mathematical context;
•worker self-check fields for quantifiers and assumptions;
•critic comparison of result to literal target;
•explicit relations for bypass, generalization, and specialization;
•completion audit that reconstructs the dependency path;
•diff reports whenever the theorem specification is intentionally revised.
A theorem revision creates a new version and a migration relation. It is never an unnoticed edit.
14.4 Prompt injection and untrusted artifacts
Literature, imported transcripts, code comments, PDFs, and webpage text can contain instructions. The system treats 
them as data:
external content is delimited and labeled;
workers are told that instructions inside sources have no authority;
tool permissions are derived from persona policy, not source text;
paths are normalized and constrained;
network access is separately approved;
commit proposals cannot alter prompts or skills unless a maintenance
workflow explicitly requests it.
Local SKILL.md files and MeTTa adapters are code. They should be pinned by hash, code-reviewed, and loaded only 
from trusted directories.
14.5 Resource governance
Budgets exist at several levels:
per dispatch: tokens, turns, tool calls, wall time
per move: maximum retries and cost
per branch: cumulative exploration budget
----- PAGE 44 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  44per proof: daily and total budget
per provider: rate and monetary limits
per Hyperon call: horizon, queue, and result count
per experiment: CPU, RAM, disk, and runtime
The scheduler can spend more on a near-complete proof or a high-information verification than on a speculative 
paraphrase. ThreadKeeper’s budget-aware separation between control and specialist reasoning aligns with this policy.19
14.6 Human control points
Default autonomy can be high while preserving clear checkpoints. Human approval is required for:
•changing the literal theorem or admissible assumptions;
•enabling new external network or shell permissions;
•spending above configured thresholds;
•importing untrusted executable code;
•declaring a major public result;
•merging proof work into a shared repository with external consequences.
The user can also freeze a branch, pin a move, veto a technique family, or request a specific audit.
14.7 Recovery and disaster tolerance
Recovery is replay-based. On startup, the proof-store service loads a trusted checkpoint or an empty MORK space, 
replays later events, rebuilds generated indexes, and compares digests. A malformed journal tail is quarantined rather 
than guessed through. Leases expire and are reaped; late results remain artifacts but require a new lease.
Backups include the journal, checkpoint manifests, prompts, skills, schemas, theorem kernels, and content-addressed 
objects. Periodic clean replay from an older checkpoint detects snapshot drift. The system should be able to reconstruct 
a proof project without access to any provider-side chat history.
14.8 Scientific integrity
The system should preserve negative results and uncertainty. It must not rewrite history to make a route look linear. 
Reports should distinguish:
what was proved
what was checked computationally
what was accepted by a critic
what remains conjectural
what was bypassed rather than solved
what failed and what was learned
This is important both for mathematical correctness and for later learning from the proof process.
15. Evaluation Methodology and Metrics
15.1 What should be measured
Completed theorems are the ultimate objective but are too sparse to guide early development. The system needs 
intermediate metrics that reward genuine research progress and penalize attractive noise.
19 H. L. Greenblatt et al., ThreadKeeper: a configurable hybrid OmegaClaw architecture for budget-aware orchestration , GitHub repository and architecture  documents, threadkeeper branch, accessed 15 July 2026. The user-supplied repository is a fork under bgoertzel-sing. 
https://github.com/bgoertzel-sing/ThreadKeeper
----- PAGE 45 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  4515.2 Correctness and epistemic discipline
Metric Definition
theorem-drift rate fraction of attempts that materially change target semantics without an explicit 
relation
unsupported-dependency 
rateclaims that cite a premise not in the ledger or not at the stated status
critic reversal rate supported claims later rejected by an independent critic
formalization mismatch rate informal claims whose first Lean statement is materially different
retraction propagation 
latencytime from refutation to reopening all dependent states
completion false-positive 
ratecompletion candidates rejected by final audit
These metrics test the architecture’s main promise: better state semantics than chat history alone.
15.3 Search productivity
Useful measures include:
verified claims per million tokens
subgoals closed per worker-hour
reusable claims created per proof
branches pruned per experiment
median attempts before earliest obstruction is identified
fraction of failures that produce a new obstruction or reusable artifact
frontier duplication rate across workers
time from new claim to reuse in another branch
A system that disproves an attractive false lemma quickly may outperform one that produces more prose.
15.4 Context quality
Measure:
•fraction of worker-used facts that came from theorem kernel, MORK structure, PLN, semantic retrieval, or 
diversity injection;
•retrieval precision judged by worker citations and critic review;
•omission rate for dependencies later found necessary;
•inclusion rate of tainted or status-misrepresented claims;
•context redundancy and token efficiency;
•reproducibility of a packet from its manifest and proof revision;
•sensitivity to removal of reverse indexes, route views, or PLN scores.
15.5 Hyperon creative-suggestion metrics
Track:
•hypotheses generated, elaborated, queued, rejected, and expired;
•novelty relative to existing move and concept neighborhoods;
•critic survival and time-to-falsification;
•subgoals closed or branches pruned;
•reusable claims and Lean-verified descendants;
•mechanism success conditioned on structural state signature;
•human-rated strategic value;
----- PAGE 46 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  46•fraction of human guidance episodes later reproduced by Hyperon;
•rate of speculative suggestions incorrectly presented as facts, which should be zero.
15.6 Human effort
The original motivation includes reducing repetitive human prompting. Measure:
human messages per durable milestone
manual “continue” or “next move” interventions per 100 cycles
human corrections of state or theorem status
human time spent reconstructing context
fraction of human guidance episodes later anticipated by Hyperon
A successful system should reduce mechanical guidance while preserving high-value mathematical collaboration.
15.7 Cost and latency
Track:
tokens and monetary cost by persona and outcome
local versus cloud specialist usage
cost per critic-accepted claim
cost of duplicate work
context compilation latency
Hyperon inference latency
experiment and Lean queue time
ThreadKeeper’s design thesis can be tested by comparing frequent inexpensive control plus selective specialist use 
against using a premium model on every cycle.
15.8 Ablation plan
A credible evaluation should compare:
1.Chat baseline: one long conversation with manual prompting.
2.Persistent workspace only:  history, graph, ledger, artifacts; no context optimization.
3.Context compiler: deterministic graph and semantic retrieval.
4.Parallel workers: shared leased frontier.
5.Hyperon ranking only:  no creative operators.
6.Hyperon creative: suggestions and human-guidance learning enabled.
7.Critic and experiments:  independent review and computation.
8.Lean integration: formal verification for selected claims.
Use both synthetic fixtures with known hidden errors and real open-ended proof efforts. The same theorem states and 
budgets should be replayed across conditions when possible.
15.9 Benchmark suite
The benchmark should contain several task types:
long elementary proof with many lemmas
proof requiring a decisive counterexample
finite combinatorial theorem amenable to exhaustive checking
analysis/algebra theorem where definitions and quantifiers are delicate
research-style route with useful bypasses and barrier theorems
formalization-friendly theorem with a mathlib path
case study imported from a real LLM interaction
The goal is not to rank models on one-step theorem proving. It is to test persistence, search management, creative 
strategy formation, and verification over long trajectories.
----- PAGE 47 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  4716. Implementation Roadmap
16.1 Phase 0: import and replay fixture
Use the supplied N105–N109 proof effort as the first realistic fixture. Create theorem, state, move, claim, attempt, 
route, artifact, bypass, and barrier atoms. Write tests that reject a false overall-completion label.
16.2 Phase 1: journal, artifact store, and in-memory atom adapter
Implement stable IDs, JSONL events, hash chaining, revision checks, content-addressed artifacts, deterministic replay, 
one explorer, and one context compiler. Use an in-memory MORK-compatible adapter for tests.
Exit criterion: crash, replay, and resume without losing or reclassifying proof state.
16.3 Phase 2: live PeTTa/MORK adapter
Build pinned PeTTa with MORK support. Implement add/remove/match/MM2 through the proof-store service, 
benchmark ground-prefix queries, and verify that replay produces the expected committed-space digest.
16.4 Phase 3: critics, experiments, and audits
Add independent criticism, experiment manifests and resource limits, taint propagation, theorem-drift checks, 
milestone reports, and deterministic exports.
16.5 Phase 4: two or three parallel workers
Add atomic leases, fencing tokens, virtual loss, stale-result handling, and model/persona diversity. Measure duplicate 
work and objective claim yield.
16.6 Phase 5: Hyperon relevance and creativity
Define concept and mechanism ontologies. Add speculative hypothesis atoms, missing-lemma abduction, analogy, 
concept blending, representation change, obstruction inversion, counterexample generation, and LLM elaboration. 
Learn from mechanism outcomes and human guidance.
16.7 Phase 6: Lean 4
Pin the toolchain and libraries. Formalize stable claims incrementally, link declaration hashes and dependency versions,  
and feed classified errors back into the active branch.
16.8 Phase 7: larger-scale learned search
After collecting attempt data, add calibrated best-first values, PUCT, progressive widening, proof-number signals, and 
transposition statistics. Shard by theorem and introduce asynchronous dispatch only when it improves verified progress 
per cost.
16.9 First engineering sprint
A practical first sprint delivers:
1.proof specification and workspace creation;
2.journal and artifact store;
3.MORK atom contract and in-memory adapter;
4.replay, digest, and audit;
----- PAGE 48 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  485.atomic two-move lease test;
6.coordinator and explorer prompts;
7.context manifest;
8.N105–N109 import sketch;
9.one end-to-end dry run with a manually supplied worker result.
16.10 Architectural decision summary
Persistent agent      proof project, not conversation
Semantic graph        MORK-backed PeTTa metagraph
Durability            revisioned append-only journal
Large content         content-addressed artifact store
Mutation              deterministic commit gate only
Parallelism           atomic leases with fencing tokens
Memory selection      MORK + PLN + semantic retrieval + diversity
Creativity            Hyperon speculative hypothesis layer
Workers               bounded ThreadKeeper personas
Verification          critics, reproducible experiments, incremental Lean
Appendix A. MORK Atom and Event Reference
A.1 Search atoms
(proof p17 layer committed state s101)
(proof p17 state-kind s101 or)
(proof p17 state-status s101 open)
(proof p17 layer committed move m204)
(proof p17 move-kind m204 reduction)
(proof p17 move-status m204 queued)
(proof p17 out s101 proposes m204 e901)
(proof p17 in  m204 proposed-by s101 e901)
(proof p17 out m204 requires s102 e902)
(proof p17 in  s102 required-by m204 e902)
A.2 Claim and provenance atoms
(proof p17 layer committed claim c308)
(proof p17 claim-status c308 provisional)
(proof p17 claim-statement-blob c308 b3_CLAIM)
(proof p17 depends-on c310 c308)
(proof p17 layer committed attempt a411)
(proof p17 attempt-on a411 m204)
(proof p17 attempt-at-state a411 s101)
(proof p17 attempt-via-route a411 r52)
(proof p17 context-manifest a411 ctx411)
(proof p17 produced-claim a411 c308)
A.3 Artifact atoms
(proof p17 layer committed artifact art92)
(proof p17 artifact-kind art92 python-source)
(proof p17 artifact-blob art92 b3_4VQ7ZJ6)
(proof p17 artifact-media-type art92 text-x-python)
(proof p17 produced-artifact a411 art92)
A.4 Speculative Hyperon atoms
(proof p17 layer speculative hypothesis h701)
(proof p17 hypothesis-kind h701 representation-change)
(proof p17 targets-subgoal h701 s103)
(proof p17 source-concept h701 concept17)
(proof p17 suggests-mechanism h701 mech27)
----- PAGE 49 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  49(proof p17 novelty h701 score081)
(proof p17 falsification-test h701 test44)
A.5 Event bundle
{
  "event_id": "ev-00982",
  "proof_id": "p17",
  "expected_revision" : 981,
  "new_revision": 982,
  "actor": "explorer-03",
  "lease": {
    "lease_id": "lease-771",
    "fencing_token": 14
  },
  "operations": [
    {"op": "add", "atom": ["proof", "p17", "claim", "c308"]},
    {"op": "add", "atom": ["proof", "p17", "claim-status", "c308", "provisional"]},
    {"op": "add", "atom": ["proof", "p17", "produced-claim", "a411", "c308"]}
  ],
  "metadata": {
    "attempt_id": "a411",
    "context_id": "ctx411",
    "result_blob": "b3_RESULT"
  }
}
A.6 Atomic lease record
(proof p17 lease-active m204 lease771)
(proof p17 lease-worker lease771 explorer03)
(proof p17 lease-expiry lease771 t20260715T120000Z)
(proof p17 lease-token lease771 14)
(proof p17 lease-route lease771 r52)
(proof p17 move-fence m204 14)
A.7 Illustrative MM2 reverse index
The exact syntax must be tested against the pinned MORK release.
(exec (index 0)
      (, (proof $p out $src $rel $dst $edge))
      (, (proof $p in $dst $rel $src $edge)))
A.8 Snapshot manifest
{
  "proof_id": "p17",
  "revision": 982,
  "event_tail_hash": "...",
  "committed_atom_digest" : "...",
  "generated_index_digest" : "...",
  "artifact_manifest_root" : "...",
  "petta_revision": "...",
  "mork_revision": "...",
  "maintenance_rule_hashes" : ["..."]
}
Appendix B. Structured Worker, Context, Event, and Suggestion Contracts
The companion bundle contains complete JSON Schema Draft 2020-12 files:
schemas/proof-spec.schema.json
schemas/proof-event.schema.json
schemas/worker-result.schema.json
schemas/context-manifest.schema.json
schemas/experiment-spec.schema.json
schemas/hyperon-suggestion.schema.json
----- PAGE 50 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  50schemas/claim.schema.json
schemas/attempt.schema.json
B.1 Worker result
The worker result binds the mathematical proposal to proof, state, move, route, lease, fencing token, and base revision. 
It distinguishes disposition from relation to the literal target and contains proposed claims, states, moves, alternatives, 
artifacts, gaps, and assumption changes.
B.2 Context manifest
Each source record contains source ID and version, retrieval channel, inclusion reason, status, score, token count, and 
optional exclusion reason. The manifest also records the packet hash, proof revision, lease, and fencing token.
B.3 Hyperon suggestion
A suggestion contains hypothesis ID, kind, target state, mechanism, candidate lemma, source and prerequisite IDs, 
expected consequences, falsification test, abductive strength, novelty, relevance, cost, risk, and speculative lifecycle 
status.
B.4 Event transaction
An event contains expected and new revisions, actor, timestamp, optional lease reference, ordered atom 
additions/removals, and metadata. The journal implementation adds the previous-event hash and event hash.
B.5 Experiment and claim records
Experiment specifications state the question, hypotheses, domain, seed policy, outcomes, inferential limits, and 
resources before code runs. A claim record stores exact statement, protocol status, dependencies, source attempt, 
critics, Lean runs, and taint sources.
Appendix C. Prompt Templates and Skill Specifications
The companion bundle contains the normative files:
prompts/omega-mathematician.md
prompts/theorem-importer.md
prompts/milestone-reporter.md
skills/proof-orchestrator/SKILL.md
skills/proof-mork-store/SKILL.md
skills/proof-context/SKILL.md
skills/proof-step/SKILL.md
skills/proof-critic/SKILL.md
skills/proof-supermind/SKILL.md
skills/proof-hyperon-creative/SKILL.md
skills/proof-experiment/SKILL.md
skills/lean4-formalizer/SKILL.md
skills/proof-audit/SKILL.md
C.1 Coordinator policy excerpt
The authoritative record is the proof workspace, not chat history.
If one move is clearly best, execute it.
If several moves are viable, execute one and queue the others.
After two non-progress attempts, invoke five-mechanism expansion.
Never silently change theorem, assumptions, quantifiers, or
constructivity requirements.
----- PAGE 51 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  51A bypass or stronger substitute is progress but not literal completion
without an explicit implication chain.
C.2 Worker result discipline
Every worker writes a structured result with disposition, relation to target, new claims and dependencies, new states 
and moves, closed goals, remaining gaps, obstructions, alternatives, artifacts, and assumption changes. Workers do not 
mutate MORK.
C.3 Hyperon creative discipline
Every creative suggestion is a speculative hypothesis with source IDs, mechanism, candidate lemma, prerequisites, 
consequences, novelty, abductive support, falsification test, and status. The LLM elaborates it; the commit gate does 
not treat it as proof.
C.4 ThreadKeeper digest discipline
The full result goes to the attempt directory. The returned digest is a single line containing attempt ID, disposition, and 
result path.
Appendix D. Configuration Example
schema_version: 1
workspace_root: ./proof-workspace
store:
  semantic_backend: mork
  durability_backend: jsonl
  one_process_per_proof : true
  checkpoint_every_events : 100
  event_hash_chain: true
  maintenance_iteration_limit : 64
artifacts:
  digest: sha256
  large_object_backend : local
scheduler:
  policy: best_first_and_or
  lease_ttl_seconds: 1800
  virtual_loss: 0.15
  stagnation_attempts_before_supermind : 2
context:
  token_budget: 60000
  structural_weight: 4.0
  ancestry_weight: 3.0
  semantic_weight: 2.5
  verification_weight : 2.0
  pln_weight: 1.3
  novelty_weight: 1.0
  redundancy_penalty: 1.5
hyperon:
  enabled: true
  write_layer: speculative
  creative_operators:
    - missing-lemma-abduction
    - analogy-transfer
    - concept-blending
    - representation-change
    - obstruction-inversion
----- PAGE 52 -----
PERSISTENT MULTI-AGENT MATHEMATICAL PROOF ARCHITECTURE
Technical design  |  52    - counterexample
    - random-deterministic-hybrid
  max_hypotheses_per_run : 12
threadkeeper:
  enabled: true
  full_results_to_files : true
  digest_max_characters : 1200
lean4:
  enabled: false
  project_path: ./lean
  command: lake env lean
security:
  allow_paths_under_workspace_only : true
  worker_network_default : false
  shell_wall_seconds: 900
  shell_memory_mb: 8192
References
The repository and documentation references below are implementation context, not dependencies of the mathematical 
claims in any proof project.
1.ASI Alliance. OmegaClaw-Core. GitHub repository and project documentation. Accessed 15 July 2026.
2.TrueAGI. PeTTa. GitHub repository and MORK-space documentation. Accessed 15 July 2026.
3.TrueAGI. MORK. GitHub repository and wiki pages on data encoding, space operations, and MM2 
reachability. Accessed 15 July 2026.
4.Patham9. mork_ffi. Public Rust FFI source. Accessed 15 July 2026.
5.B. Goertzel-Sing fork and H. L. Greenblatt et al.  ThreadKeeper. GitHub repository and subagent-design 
documentation. Accessed 15 July
6.OpenCog Hyperon. Project overview and experimental repository. Accessed 15 July 2026.
7.TrueAGI. Probabilistic Logic Networks: MeTTa-native PLN for Hyperon . Accessed 15 July 2026.
8.Lean Project and Mathlib Community. Lean 4, Lake, and mathlib4.
9.Proof Effort Continuation . 47-page PDF supplied with this design, especially pp.  27–46 (N105–N109 and 
artifact lists).
Companion implementation bundle.  The source package accompanying this document contains the MORK schema, 
illustrative MM2 rules, JSON contracts, OmegaClaw wrappers, ThreadKeeper personas, skill files, Python reference 
service, tests, and import/replay examples.